http://acmssearch.sl.nsw.gov.au/search/itemDetailPaged.cgi?itemID=872721

Narrative of life in Holsworthy Internment Camp at Liverpool, N.S.W., ca. 1915-March 1919 / Frank W. Bungardy
MLMSS 261/Box 2/Item 12


[Page 1]

Sept 6th 1917. Letter handet to Official Visitor by Camp Comitee, re the almost unbearable condition of Camp, also one send to Minister of Deffence Letter read following:

Adrian Kuore K.C. Esq Official Visitor to Conc. Camps: Sir. We the undersigned Internees of the G.C.C. Camp Holdsworthy beg to respektfully aske you to present the following complaints to His Excellency the Govenor General of the Comonwealth of Aus. The Germ. Conc. Camp Liverpool has now been in excistence over 3 years & wheras some of our complaints hawe been dealt with, we hawe for the past 3 years suffered with the intolerable dust nuisance. In spite of our constant complaints to Camp Comandant, Consuls, Official Visitor by exhoustion of all other means to bring about an alteration or improvement. Nothing whatever has been done by the Authoritys.

We are facing now the fourth summer of imprisonement. As the Camp has been considerably enlarged & the dust factories surrounding the inner Camp hawe grown acordingly, the conditiones inside are very near intolerable. With the slightest wind, the dust flies & there is no protection against it. The barraks are open on 1 side, & there is not one single spot in the Camp wher one can escape the dust. Sometimes, for days at a stretch we breathe dust laden air. Often we hawe to fetch our food from the Kitchen in a dust storm. The food itself, the road, the sleeping quaters wher we also hawe to eat, everything is permeated with dust. Naturaly constant irritationes of eyes, nose mouth & respiration tractus. The filth we are compelled to live in owing to this dust, we cannot remowe. Nothing whatever has been atempted by the Authoritys. The sleeping quaters are infisted with vermin & this coupled with the dust menace


[Page 2]

makes us wiew our life in the coming Summer with the outmost concern. The long captivity at the same place & the endless monotony of the life it is impossible perhaps to alter, but we are only asking what is right when we demand that at least an attempt is made to minimise this danger to our health. Up till now we only hawe had promisses & hawe waited from year to year for something to eventuate. We therefore beg to aske as a minimum conditiones for relief of this intolerable state.

No. l Making asphalt roads ll. The space between barraks to be oiled or aplication of special preparation as for instance Garvia lll & considerate area around each Kitchen to be treated as par ll. lV The larg remaining spaces, playground ectra to be well watered at least 3 times per diem. V. 3 large Watercarts to be providet for the inclusive use within the compound We expect & trust that his excelency the Gov General of the Com. Of Australia will direct that our just demands are dealt with without further delay. Signed Camp Committee.

Sept 10 1917. G.C.C. Minister of Deffence Melbourne. Sir, We the undersigned Civilian Internees herewith earnestly request you to bring our internement at least into the line with the minimum requirements as given in the Hague Convention for the treatement of Civilian Pris: We do not aske for priveledges, but we do aske at least the same sanitary & hygienic consideration that is allowed every criminal in a state prison. The Criminal imprisoned in any of the jails hawe (so we are informed) each one cell, whereas we are herdet together with a floorspace of 9 feet by 2 for each of us to live, to sleep, to store our posessiones on and to take our Meals in. The Criminals in jail live in clean cells, whereas we are condemed to live in Vermin infested sheds, the bugs, fleece & mosquitos eat us alive during the hot season. The Criminals in jail are allowed frequent baths,


[Page 3]

whereas we, who are without means, do not get a hot bath. The Criminals in jail are not exposed to the Weather, whereas our sheds are open and expose us to all clemencies of the weather. The sheds being unbearable, hot in sumertime and absolutely unfitt for human habitation during cold or rainy Weather. The Criminals in jail live in hygenic houses, wheras during the slightest – Wind we live in a hell of dust without any cover or protection against the bacteria and germladen dust. The Criminals in jail are allowed to take their meals in clean cells, their food being cooked in clean Kitchens and carried along clean and dustfree passages, wheras we hawe to carry our food through rain, sunshine or dust storms into the dustcovered 9 X 2 feet shed space, wher we hawe to eat it, notwithstanding that the bacteria & germ originating from the sputun of tubercoilose persones, from the urinals wich hawe free access to. The Criminals in jail live in quite cells, wheras we are herdet together so closely that the continual noise of a multitude, confined on a smal space is several trying & nervous. For above reasones every one wich is perfectly true description of the conditiones excisting hier. The wiche of a large majority of the Civil Internees of this Camp is to be able to exchange this hygenically & sanitoraly unbearable place with the jail, wich is in comparission to our mode of living would be far prefferable in this respekt. But we the undersigned do not intend to committ any breaches of the law for the purposes of getting into better sanitary & hygenic conditions by a conviction to a term of imprisonment. During 3 years of internement all petitiones for improvements hawe been unsuccessfull in this respekt. In spite of all promisses, no improvements


[Page 4]

hawe been made, our experience of past [indecipherable] in camp tell us, that the horrors of past [indecipherable] will be intensified during the coming hot weather & will make our mode of live, wich allready is an insult to humanity, still more unbearable we now aske you to transfer us into one of the Staate jails, wher we hope to find at least a refuge for the undescrible horrors of the Vermin & Dust plagues. We beg to inform you that we are handing copies of this communication to the Consuls of Switzerlined and Sweden with the request that they may support this application to you Signed the Camp Committee. About the time of writing this the Military Officials tried to close all smal shops inside our compound, with the exception of 4 Restaurant Caffees 3 Baker Shops & 2 Butchershops. The Internees had a petition list made out & signed by 75% of the Camp Inmates, handet to Comandant wich in consequence let them remain as previously.

During ende of this month, we had issue giwen to us, to return all empty jamtins, regulation cut open & clean. We Internees looked upon this order as ridicoulous, & requested of the Authorities to issue us Tinopeners to enable us to fullfill the orders & instruction giwen, but as no tinopeners wher issued to us, no tin got returned. 17/9 2 pair second hand soxs issued to each Internees, 18/over 1000 Internees applied & petitioned for voluntory labor, as he might direct & at any place, but must be outside barbwire & under same conditiones as our Parole. This request however has been refused by the Deffence Department.


[Page 5]

8 October 1917 first [indecipherable] in Austrian Theather. This Hall has been build by a Syndicate of Austr. Internees, wich however run short on Capital after spending 200£, Upon an application the remainder of the necessary money, to finish this Hall, the money wher granted by the Canteen Comptrollor, to be taken out of the Camp Canteen funds, to be repayd 14£ weekly to Canteen. About this time Menke died in Camp Hosp. This Gentleman wher the only surviving Member of the World Known St Mathias Expedition South Sea, wher all the Members got murdered by the Natives but this Gentleman. 700 0 arrived from New Guinea for poor Internees. During this month a String Band consisting of Proffessionals Prof Sauer gawe every Sunday afternoon a free Concert in the Austrian Hall to help the long & weary Sunday to pass away. 427 Internees arrived from West Aust & Victoria respektively. Two of this batch, Austrianes by Nationality, when entering Camp, got a hiding by their Countryman for hawing denied the Austrian flag & hawing sidet with Austrian Enemys. They had to seek medical attendance & Keept in Hospital. The Authority hawing been notified, that even this two ever entered Camp something more serious would happen, as they hawing denied in W.A. to bring Austrians, but Serbs, also hawing tried to enlist in the A.I.F. so therefore enemys to our camp. When those two got convalescent, as their wher no other camp for them, they wher put into Singh Singh, to brood over their past foolishnes to deny their Birthright. 17.22 Continual Rain made the Camp a Sea of mud. 24/A internee tried to comitt suicide, by cutting his troat


[Page 6]

1 October 1917.18 New arrivals from Queensl. On this day, the Camp wher notiefied by the Swiss Consul, that Germ. Internees wich had legal Papers in their possession to prove their Nationality would receive 10Sh per month of the Germ Imperial Governement. If not they would hawe to await untill statement of Internees hawe been verified by the Germ. Governement. It wher also a stipulation of the Germ. Governement, that if a Internee earned 10Sh per month, or had 10Sh or more send to him by post, this grant would cease for that month. As it has proven during the next months, this whole has proven a farce, as certainly some, who wher lucky enough to hawe documents in their possession, recieved the 10Sh, but others failed. Out of 1700 Internees, who had their Names entered only about 200 recieved it, the others had to await untill notiefied by the Germ. Governement. With the exception of those, who wher naturaliced in Australia & no doubt the Australian Governement know their Names, all the Rest are & still are Germans, else they wouldn’t hawe been hier. Why If in possession of legal documents & prove that you are a Germ. 6 Novemb, Notice all dogs in Camp must be registered, registration fee is 2/9 payable at Military Police. If not registered, same will be shot. 19/ Meeting of all Internees, regarding the unemployment in Camp, the Internees send a petition to Governement for manual labor, as a Internee under the present system of work wher enabled to earn, if the weather conditiones wher favorable every 10 weeks the sume of 12Sh, that is, every 8th week their turn would come to work 2 weeks for 1 shilling per day. 12Sh is insufficient to buy additional food, wich is necessary to add to our scanty allowance to keep body & soul together. 25/ Jubilee of the foundation of this


[Page 7]

Camp 3 years ago. About this month Railway work started to connect this Camp with liverpool 4 miles distant. All the workers recieved 23 per day & rationes 26/2 Internees escapeed in following matter. They aske for permission to goe into the Bush to get some Bush timber, wich got granted. Under escort of 1 Guard they left to procure their wants. When amongst the bushes they disarmed the Guard, in taking his Gun away & tied him to a tree, wich the guard however managed to undo the rope, after an hour strenous labor, returned to Camp, to notify the officials of the daring escape. The escapees wher recaptured on the 29th led under the guard of 2 Officers 2 Military Police & 2 guards to the place wher they had hid the Rifle on the following day they wher escorted to Darlinghurst jail to await trial. From their they managed to escape again & recaptured on the 7th November laying alongside a Country road about 15 miles from Sydney in imitation Uniform of the Australian I.F. in company of a Australian Soldiers. They wher charged on their arrest with breaking & entering & stealing 2 watches. At the trial however it got proven that the Aust Soldier had comitted the crime. The soldier wher sentenced for desertion & stealing. The Internees for desertion only.

[the following is a small cutting from a newspaper]

It is true that Senator Pearce has notoriously failed in his duty as an administrator of the Defence Department. A Royal Commission has found that under his administration huge sums of public money were wasted, and that his management was inefficient and unbusinesslike. Senator Pearce refused to resign his office after this condemnation. He contented himself with sacrificing subordinate officers while he clung to place and pay himself.


[Page 8]

with a rasor. He wher taken to hospt & Keept for treatement. Nov 2 Senator Pearce, the Minister of Defence wisits to Conc. Camp. This hon. Gentleman however only viewed the Camp from outside, as to our estimation he wher afraid to enter Camp, to meet our Committee, & being compelled to listen to our numerous & just complaints, regarding treatement in general, food & clothing. 9 One Internee digged a hohle in Excercise ground with a piece of wood, for passtime & to break the monotony, also to ocupy his mind. The guard on the observation tower noticed his action. He telephoned to the Police, wich came & arrested him, & under the charge of trying to escape, he wher sentenced to 17 days lockup. 10 On account of big prices ruling in the Canteen for vinegar a few Internees venegar in the compound. The apparat wher confiscated by Police under the Order, that some gets used to distill Whiskey. This day 40 Internees arrived in Sydney from fiji, South Sea Isl. Amongst those wher several Families, wich got torn from their property & home under the Imperial Order to be interned in Australia, becourse they happen to be born in Germany. 8 of those came to this Camp 32 wher escorted to the Bourke Camp wher all the Families & Females are Keept interned by the Australian Governement. During this month, the dust nuisance wher allmost unbearable in this Camp. With regard to this, the Comittee made another complaint to those Official in charge of this Camp & our internement. 19 The Internees of the Bourke Camp applied to this Camp for Xmass presents for the Children interned their, as in that Camp their wher 50 Juveniles, 8 having been born behind Barbwire. A small collection resulted in getting the 21 going Camp Shool.


[Page 9]

money to buy the necessary material, as all the presents will be manufactured in Camp. Several Internees comenced straight away, to make the Children happy, & to show them that their "Country Men hawe not forgotten them, even behind Barbwires & in enemy country. 17 A Austrian Internee got shot, becourse he satt to close to the fence while watching football practise at the football ground. 19/6 new arrivals from Queensl. 6 S.A. & 7 from N.S.W. 20/2 Whiskey distilleries confiscated this day 2 pair second hand socks issued. The Royal Comission visited Camp & viewing us Internees while recieving dinner. For the ocassion our dinner provide an extra large one. We recieved our weekly ration of potatoes all on this day, & consequently had to goe without untill next week, during the afternoon, they viewed several articles manufactured in Camp for exhibition, to impress the Gentleman with the idle talent & if possible to procure work for Internees. 7 December 2 Internees escaped through fence. On this day the authority comenced to hawe the ground of the open Washplace cemented. The roof over this place wher errected in June 1918. 9/ Exhibition of the presents made for the Children in Burke Camp, also a voluntary collection of money. This proved a great success. Presents wher their gallore of all description for boys & Girls. The Bakerys of the Camp presented also a great quantity of diverse Xmass cakes. 10/ 55 [indecipherable] to each Internee out of Canteen fund, as a Xmas present by the Military Authority. This day we recieved clothing consisting of trousers & coat made out of Rakhi; the Coat had a large white diamond at the back & the trousers a white stripe. The


[Page 10]

Holdsworthy
December 26, 1917

The Official Visitor
The Honorable Mr Justice Harvey
Sydney

Sir,

Following the complaints which have been made to you on behalf of the internees receiving visitors, we, the undersigned Australian subjects herewith beg to record our most emphatic protest against the treatment meted out to our families and ourselves on Christmas Day, Tuesday 25th of December 1917.

The conditions, imposed on that day by the Military Authorities, were simply disgraceful and a serious menace to the health of the internees and their visitors alike.

The week before Christmas, the whole visiting ground was cleared by order of the Commandant. All scrubs and bushes were removed. Only a few trees were left standing but they afforded very insufficient shelter only to a few internees and their families, whilst the great majority of those who came out on Tuesday were absolutely without protection and had to sit on the bare ground. No fixtures such as seats pr benches were allowed to be erected, and the putting up of any tents, blankets or flies as protection against wind, sun or rain was strictly prohibited.

Up to two o’clock, the day was very hot and sultry and the direct heat of the sun very trying. Then rain set in and continued to fall all the afternoon. Most of the ladies and children had come out in light summer dresses. We tries, of course, to shelter them, by using the scanty means permitted by the Military Authorities viz, putting up umbrellas and covering them with blankets brought from the camp. These measures, of course, proved of no protection at all. Most of those who remained on the ground as well as those who took refuge under the few trees were soon wet through. There is no sheltering shed or hut on the visiting ground or near it, and even those


[Page 11]

few who had been cautious enough to bring rain coats out soon had entirely wet feet etc. from the long grass. The result was that most of the visitors, some of whom had specially come over for that visit from other States, had to prepare for departure an hour earlier than usual as they were afraid of catching a severe cold.

The Camp Commandant, Major Alsopp, inspected the visiting ground during the afternoon and evidently had no fault to find.

It was bad enough for us to be drenched to the skin, then to march back to the overcrowded barracks and be unable to find any place wherein to change and dry the wet clothes and the blankets which had to be used again for the night. But for most of the ladies the experience involved a serious menace to their health and the well-being of the children, as they had several hours journey back to their homes in the suburbs of Sydney. We are now anxiously waiting for news from them. Most of the children who came out on Tuesday last were under the age of ten.

To allow such vicious and callous treatment even to be meted out to enemy subjects and their visitors of enemy nationality would be a disgrace for a Government which always claims to uphold the cause of humanity and civilisation. But to submit their own subjects most of whom have innocently suffered long years of captivity and most of whose wives and children are Australian born, to such ruthless and vindictive treatment is an abominable outrage which requires an immediate and full investigation.

By Act of Parliament, the Military Authorities have been given the power to intern anybody. It would be folly for us, for obvious reasons, to challenge during the war the validity of the respective acts and regulations. But the Commonwealth Parliament has never given or intended to give the Defence Department or the Camp Authorities the right to abuse that power of internment in the incredible way in which it is continually being done


[Page 12]

and to disregard all the elementary rules of fairness, decency and humanity. We will not speak of chivalry and courtesy, for the treatment meted out to our wives and ourselves and our experience of and contact with the officers of the Defence Department and of the Camp administration compels us to think that many of them, have either never known or have altogether forgotten what those to qualities mean.

We understand that the married enemy subjects in this camp will immediately communicate, through the Swiss and Swedish, Consuls, with their Home Governments and urge them to take drastic counter-measures. The Commonwealth Government is well aware of the fact that we are not in a position to safeguard our interests in a similar manner. Therefore, the attitude adopted towards Australian internees is all the more despicable. However, we would be obliged to you, if you would make it quite clear to our Commonwealth Government that, in spite of all disabilities, we and our families are not prepared to submit to these indecencies and gross violations of our citizens’ right any longer.

We demand an immediate and full inquiry to trace the person or persons who ordered this new atrocity. If a Camp official is directly responsible, we demand that he be reprimanded and, if practicable, removed from the Camp. If, however, the culprit is at Head Quarters, Melbourne, as we have every reason to believe, we would thank you for a direct recommendation, addressed to the Minister for Defence personally that that man be relieved of any work in connection with internment matters. We think the Minister’s sense of honor and fairness will cause him to admit that it can serve no good purpose and that it is of no credit to the Australian Government to have men in charge of internment affairs who are continually asking in a spirit of panic and vindictivness and are giving vent to their own bitter and antagonistic feelings by submitting us and our families to the most dishonorable, humiliating and savage maltreatment they can think of.


[Page 13]

In conclusion, we beg to mention that a large section of internees are in a state of great excitement over the matters just described and that there is no telling where this will lead to, if immediate redress is not given. There is a limit to the endurance of even the most strongminded person. Years of unwarranted captivity generally tend to increase the well-founded indignation and bitterness and create a dangerous and mutinos frame of mind.

If our demands should not be promptly acceeded to, we and dour families shall find ways and means to put before the Parliamentary Representatives and the Public the full details not only of this last outrage but of the continual insults offered to interned Australian Subjects. Efforts may then be made to gag us as has already been attempted, but for any developments that may then happen, the Federal Authorities must take the responsibility. They have now been warned often enough. Up to now they have ostrich-like buried their heads in red-tape and professed to be ignorant of what is going on. It is high time, the Minister of Defence Department, so that this intolerable suspicion and unfairness is removed from the Australian Government’s dealings with its own subjects, even if they are interned subjects.

Kindly acknowledge receipt of this letter and oblige.

Yours faithfully,


[Page 14]

convicts close cannot be more disfigured, as those recieved singlets & boots could not be issued, as their wher none in store. Another wait, like usual & so get cheated, as our clothing.

…due, as per regulation. The time however only counts from day time…………….This might be in 3-7 months time. This day we had send some leaf tobacco from Germ. New Guinea, about 2lb had to be devidet between Internees. 24/ Xmass eve very quite. Band gawe a few Selectiones during evening. 25/ Xmass, a day like any other hier in Camp 26/ celebration by all Clubs. New years night. About 3000 Internees walked beside the Barbwire like animals in the Zoo, while the rest wher awaiting midnight in the barraks & the better off in the Caffees. 2pm The Camp Band played selectiones at diverse places of the camp for ½ hour, than we all returned to our sheds called barraks, & our pets, that is Bugs & fleece. New year wher also day like any other day. This day during the afternoon it rained & blowed terrible. As several N.S.W. worried Internees had a visit of their Wifes & family, they got soaked Well. No shelter of any sort is providet at the visiting ground & Camp regulation, forbid the use of tents & blankets etc. The Internees family must leave their homes at about 8 o’clock in the morning to reach hier at 11am to depart 5pm so unable to reach home before 8 pm, the Reader can gues, if a treatement of this kind, in letting wives & Children remain in the open during heavy rain, to visit their Husb, father & former breadwinner if that corresponds with religious, civiliced law regulations. The Internees forwardet a letter of complaints to the Minister of Deffence, to the visitor & to the consul.


[Page 15]

During the past year their died in this Camp on the following dates.

Internees 18/3 20/4 23/6 6/7 4/8 4/8 10/8 15/9 16/10 31/10 3/11 8/11 8/12 5/11 3/10 2/10 4/10 10/10

At ende of this year the following is the list per head of membership of the different Clubs. Voter John Turnverein 500 Kraft sport Club. Deutche Eivhe 253 Light Atheletic Club Sparta 150 Football Club, Liverpool 80 Melb 45 S.A. 50 Gaifun 32 Rothnest 27 Zagreb (Aust 30 Boulder City 17 Eagle eye 16 Comet 22 G.C.C./5 Fistball Club 15 Sydney 12 Isingtan 12 Military foot & fistball Club 30. Schlagball Hansa 20 Stern 17 Schach Club 150 Hockey Club Germania 18 Kianthou 22 Victoria 27 Yalta Mortale 29 Tennis Club 20. Their wher several shools in languages & proffessiones in this Camp, About 40 shops dealing with allsorts, but mostly foodstuffs, tobacco, Clothing & fruit. Now we comence 1918 & no nearer to peace & liberty than in 1915. How long more will we hawe to remain in this living Dante Inferno or Black Hole of Australia. Wher is Civilisation or humanity. Are we forgotten. It is impossible for us Internes to cry out to the world & so contradict the glorious account printed in the daily Austr. Newspapers, as the Censorship of our Camp is very strict any mentioning of real facts in this Camp & the letter to be shure to be returned to sender. I personaly have had hunderts returned on account of containing as marked prohibited Matter" 23 January the first installation of Electric light on certain places in Camp, wich wher indeet much needet. 14/ 1 Sh each Internee issued out of moneys recieved from the Germ Red Cross Society. During this month the first Germ Governement


[Page 16]

assistance arrived for distribution under condition as mentioned previously. 26/ The Soldier Guards celebrating aniversary day with a Sports programe. They had arranged a special Band from Liverpool. On this day the Railway build entirely by Internees from hier to Liverpool run its first Carriages over the lines. The train wich carried passengers only consisting of Engine & tender & 7 Passenger carriages made 2 trips to convey all the public to the Sports ground about 1000 yards from our Camp. The Visitors during the fornenoon came right up to the Barbwires & viewed us, as if we wher some strange & seldom seen beings, or dit they envy us, knowing that we spend mostly all time in idlenes & thinking a Governement had invited us against our will to be their guest However during the afternoon the Military Police recieved orders to keep the public about 100 yards away. Their we wher wievid from the distance by eager eyes young & old untill the train departed. Needles to say hunderts of Internees to break the monotony & to see females from the distant, some had seen non for over the period of 3 years in reality lined up inside the Barbwire & viewed them also all day long so the treat wher on both sides. I must state the females visitores wher the most eager ones to get a narrow glymse of us & the military Police had all their time cought out to keep the ladys at the limited distance. 27/1 Germ Emperors birthday. This wher celebrated by Reville at 6am parade by Reservist Internees & Recruits. 11am High Mess in the open. Afternoon Happy Gathering in Gymnastic Hall with Coffee & Cakes, during the Evening Patriotic Concert with Vaudeville & Speeches in the Austrian


[Page 17]

Hall also a good programe in the German Theater. 30/ An eye specialist arrived from Sydney to attend Eyesore Internees as per Notice issued to Camp. 32 Internees reported. This so called excamination however only proved a Farce. The specialist arrived at the camp Hosptal at 2p.m. & left at 3.30p.m. Within 90 minutes this Expert had attendet the Eyes of 220 Internees. So the reader can guess, that it has been impossible in this time to attend the eyes properly. I recon this only a waster of Puplic Money by the Federal Governement. I must also state my grievance for the strict Censorship ruling hier in Camp. If I send a letter to my Wife residing in S.A. asking for help & assistance either in food or clothing or any other thruthfull statement concerning our treatement in general, are returned allways by the Censor under a protest of some sort, however letters containing Lies regarding treatement in general, I can be shure this one gets forwardet by next mail. Personal Letters containing complaints of conditiones & treatement to Internees or their family & adressed to the Minister of Deffence are mostly confiscated by Camp Censor or returned to Sender. I personaly hawe requested of Capt Lloyd the Intelegence Officer in charge of all Internees corespondence, to see that that a letter adressed to the Minister of Deffence containing a personal complaint would get to the adress, but as I never recieved reply, I am positive this one also, wandered like 1000 others into the waste paper basket. During this month the Xmas parcels arrived from Germany, however they wher mostly broken or damaged, also in several


[Pages 18]

instances part of the contents missing. If I ever send a parcel containing products of this Camp to my family I never wher certain if it would arrive, either the condition. A jewel Box toke 4 months to reach the adresse at Koogarah less than 20 miles from hier, after a lot of Corespondence, same wher discovered in the Sydney Railway station. A big carved picture frame toke 2 months to reach S.A. after a lot of coresponde & complaints to the Departement in charge of Parcels hier. A Internee from S.A. send to his Children in Maitland, S.A. a box containing a Dolls sweep of furniture made by himself containing 38 pices for Xmas present. The Journey from Liverpool to Maitland generaly takes the Mail 7 days at most however this parcel toke 3 weeks to reach its destination, minus 18 of the best pices & the others mostly broken & damaged. The Internees when sending this parcel had everything securely paket first in a tin thance in a wooden box. This Internee applied for damages of the Railway Commissioner for damages, however his complaint has been ignored & never recieved a reply untill his release 
October 1918. February comenced again with heavy rain & in consequent of the bad drainage the Camp is a sea of mud. This makes our life in hier allmost unbearable on account of Mud & acomodation facility for drying facility. On account of the Rain we 4500 Internees wher compelled to remain in the overfilled sheds called barraks morning noon & night only venturing out if forced at Mealtimes to the Kitchen 400 yards distant, to get our food on shallow plates to return in quik haste to our stables. To our Hotel acomodation "fit only for a pig if the Society for Dumb animals does not know of it wich amounted to the space refered on several former ocassion


[Page 19]

we had to use as Sitting Dinning Drawing, sleeping & store Room. all day long as it wher impossible to venture out unccessaringly in the heavy rain. As mostly by all of the Internees had been interned a considerable time & as the Clothing issue by the Authority has been allways scanty & mostly of shody goods, the Internees wher compelled to use the later method as their private clothing, or else run about with a loincloth on. A good few hundert wher compelled to use the later method as their private clothing had worn out & so could not riske going out to get wett. Those who had Clothing for reasones as stated previously, not hawing facilitys for drying our Clothing, they would hawe been compelled in time to run about like Adam in the paradise, only they would have to run about in the Germ. Conc. Camp as providet by the Australian Federal Governement to their Civil Internees. As it would hawe been impossible to dry it in our shed.

Every internee lived in fear of the abattoirs as our Hospital generally got called, or to face the Butcher the Nick Name for the doctor engaged their, for allmost every Internee doubts if this Gent ever passed excaminationes to treat suffering animals, much less Human beings. So out of formerly stated reasones, we had to breathe the stuffy air of our over crowdet sheds, If it had not been for the cleanlines generaly excercised between the Internees themselves, I am positive a deadly desease of some sort would have broken out in this Camp long ago, for the cleaning facilities issued by the Authorities for our body & Camp in general wher very inadequate. Mostly all the cleaning Utensils used by Internees hawe been


[Page 20]

bought & payed for themselves, becourse it appears the Authorities do not seem to care for our health & wellbeing from a Civilian & human standpoint. 12/2 A population of 1 Barrak wher permitted b special favor of the Commandant to go swimming in the creek nearby. As of course those Internees had to be guardet, the guards looked upon this as extra labor & so tried to giwe the Internees a lively time while marching out to & from the creek. Every 100 yards, they wher ordered by a Officer in charge of the guard to Halt" to give the Soldier guard Smoke O. than ordered to fall in in fours Soldiers fashion & ordered to march to step. As this is against the Rules issued at the Hague Conference 3 Internees refused to march like Soldiers as they wher Civilianes also resented to the treatement meted out on the road to the creek, becourse as they told the Officer in charge of the guard they had been told to be permitted to goe for a Swim & not for a Drill. When those Internees returned to the Maingate those 3 Internees refferred to wher arrested under the charge of giving insolence to a superior Officer. "Against this unjust arrest the whole Company Internees complained & asked permission to interview the Comandant regarding the wrongfull arrest. The Officer in charge of the Guard, a major, however refused their request & ordered the Guard to charge with bayonets fixced." Wich order the guard instantly [indecipherable], & they used their bayonets most effectively on the Internees, some halfnaked, with the result of 7 Internees remained at the gate with bayonet wounds. The woundet Internees wher compelled to wait 1 hour & a half at the Gate previously to being permitted to being transferred to


[Page 21]

the Camp hospital to receive medical treatement to hawe their wounds dressed. After this episode the Comp of Internees next on turn the following day, forfeited voluntary the priveledge to goe for a swim & remained in Camp. 18/2 Some Cigarres arrived from somewher unknown to the writer from some unknown Gentleman, as their wher close on 500 Internees in this Camp it amounted to 1 Cigar to 12 Internees. In the majority of cases, the Internees draw lots, to see who wher the lucky winner. On this Night their wher a big row in Singh Singh, shouting singing & playing improvised instruments. The Inmates had their motive for this row. Hawing been informed by some of their mates in the General Compound, by a secret communication that a former Camp Comander, who wher however at present in the tuberculose Compound & wich had participated in the melee in 1916 in hawing this Camp cleared of some undesirables, being in the Camp lockup, they wanted to be locked up 4 in number too, so as to hawe revenge. In this venture they susceedet, & when they wher locked up in Camp lockup, the door hardly hawing closed behind them they sett upon this Invalid & knocked him into insensibility. As two inmates of Singh Singh refused to participate in the making of the row to get arrested, they wher sett upon also by their fellow Inmates to severly dealt with 7 carried at 2am to the Camp hospital. The next day the Inmates who had been the leaders of this row wher taken to Darlinghurst Jail in the Red X vehicles, drawn by 4 horses. The 6 Internees entered the


[Page 22]

wagon singing I.W.W. songs also songs made by themselves concerning the Military Officials governing this Camp. Their guards consisted of 4 Soldiers at the back inside the vehicles & 2 mounted Light horseguards, near the whole being fully armed. As it is now over 3 years since this Camp got started, the Cold Water shower bath is still uncovered, only fenced off with bush timber & some bags. The floor has lately been cemented, but however no grating for the Internees to stand up on, hawe been supplied. As the timber is expensive & Bush timber unsuited for this purpose, we internees wher helpless, & so compelled to stand on the bar floor when using the showers, wich is shurley deterimental to our health to a certain degree. March I Rees a Naturaliced Australian Subject, who had been a Resident of Australia for over 30 years, & owner of a Well known Brewery in Sydney got released on account of sick health. Since Internement this Gentleman, has been in the Camp hospital under medical treatement. His release however dit not consist of his liberty, but only to being enabled to return to his own home under guard, wher he wher detained, allways under a guard. This Gentleman is not permitted to goe anywher without permission & allways under Guard, neither receive Visitors without the special permission of the Minister of Deffence. This Gentleman must also pay, as I hawe it from a Person well to be trusted, the wages for this guard, also food & house came without repayment. This day each Internee recieved ½ of cheese wich had been bought & payd for out the Camp Bread saving fund. This of course needless to say, wher a luxcury for the Internees ½ lb cheese each. Some of the younger sex sold theirs for 3 pence to enable.


[Page 23]

them to buy some cigarettes 7/ the Singh Singh internees wher tried by Court marshial at the Darlinghurst jail, (State account of Sydney Daily) 8/ Several Internees managed to escape by cutting the barbwire under the following circumstances, as on this Night the Camp Band gawe a Concert in the pavillion wich is about 15 yards of the Barbwire, the guard on duty their listened to the music, & so neglected his beat", this advantaged the Internees used to got away unnoticed. They cut a hohle big enough for a Man with a wheelbarrow to go through. The hohle only got discovered the next morning by Military Police. The next day 2 Internees got recaptured at a town 10 miles away from hier & placed in the town lockup, Liverpool & transferred next day to Camp for Courtmarshial 10/ This day for the first time our Breadrationes got carted into Camp & delivered at the Corner of each Barracks. Up till now 2 Internees from each CP had to beat the maingate at 6 a.m, to proceed to the Store, wher they would recieve the breadration for 100 Internees of their Company. To make it easy, they put into a big bag & slung same unto a Pole, & shouldering same they returned to Camp. In some cases a quarter of a mile to their barraks, As this wher without pay, the Internees in each Barrak toke it in turns, those who dit not like to go found soon a willing one for the[indecipherable] of 3 pence. 13/ 4 Internees tried to escape by the same means & ways as the last ones Who effected their escape. They had cut the wires & wher allready through the fence, however this time the Guard dit not listened to the music, but wher on the


[Page 24]

March 8 1918 II

GERMANS CHARGED
"Are we I.W.W. Members?"
Evidence of Threats

The action against the seven interned Germans, commenced yesterday, was continued this morning before the Military Court at Victoria Barracks. Lieutenant-Colonel Y. le Gay Brereton presided, and his associates were Major Murray and Captain Spain. Lieutenant Lloyd prosecuted.

The accused Germans were: O Kussicke, F Schimming, M Vorber, C Berenson R Muller, A Krist, and Goller. The complaint was that on February 18, while interned at Holdsworthy, and to the prejudice of the safe custody and control of prisoners of war, they left their platoon sheds after "lights out" and created a tumult close to the fence round the compound in which they were confined, continuing this although ordered by Lieutenant Morton to return to their shed.

Corporal William Henry Poole, of the Military Police, was cross-examined by Krist: Did any of the officers give you orders to especially blacken me and Jack Goller? - Certainly not. Are you aware that we are supposed to be members of the I.W.W.? - I have heard so. - I have seen placards you have in the compound.

Were we pointed out and mentioned, so as we looked like the leaders of the strike? – No, I know that there are I.W.W. prisoners in the compound. I only know what I have seen.

Sergeant Lever said that the accused were making a row together. Krist was walking up and down, using filthy language. Kussicke said: "We won’t always be in this compound; and when we get out the German Governors will give you ten years."

To Kussicke: Witness had been on duty at the camp for two years. He had never known Kussicke misbehave previously, and it was possible that he heard only the last of Kussicke’s remarks, while approaching the compound.

To Schimming: Witness had been for 10 months at "Sing Sing". Neither then nor on any occasion previous to the date in question had he heard Schimming make insulting remarks.

When questioned by Muller the witness stated: "If you hadn’t started a row we wouldn’t have had so much trouble with any of the others." Corporal J.T. Anscombe, who was in charge of No 2 Company Guard on the night of February 18, said that about 8.20p.m., at what was known as No 1 Catwalk at the camp, he heard someone within the compound sawing wood, and on notifying the field officer he was ordered, with a file of the guard to the compound On their reaching the entrance one of the seven Germans gave the alarm to the others, who lined up and prevented a passageway for the inspecting officer. The Germans obeyed their officer's order to stand back, but Goller said: "Don’t talk to us like dogs – we are gentlemen" The guard left the compound, whither witness, at 10.30 p.m. was attracted by further disturbance, and where he saw a prisoner with a axe striking the fourth upright pile holding the partition of the platoon shed. It was too dark to discern who the axeman was.

Proceeding.


[Page 25]

alert watching, so the escapee got challenged to halt, wich he dit, this gawe the others a chance to escape, when the Police arrived they only found the one, & placed some in the lockup 14 another Internee tried to escape at the same place & same way this one also got detected & placed in the Lockup. This last Internee know beforehand that his attempt would be unsucessfull, but as he explained to me personally, that he wished to get a change & a trip to Darlinghurst to break the Monotony. 15/ A Internee wich had looked upon the Canvas suit issued to us by the Authorities, on account of the large diamond at back as a convict garb, had painted upon it Gott strafe England" he got arrested & recieved the next day 1 month darlinghurst jail. The illicit Whiskey stills wher in full swing, the prices ranging from 6 to 12 Sh according to quality. Internees carried smal flaskes in their pockets & hawking it by the Nobbers each Nobbler costing 3 pence. 19/ The Authority providet the Inmates with some labor as they started to build 16 Barracks 4 shools & 1 Bakery. The work on the Barraks got hurried as even on a Sunday, the Internees hammered all day along under order of the Authoritys for same pay, to hawe same ready in specified time. State [indecipherable] letter re the Camp Conditiones to the Official visitor. 22/ A Internee wich wher employed as a Carpenters labor, toke a plank upon his shoulder & went pass the guard towards the hospital, as he had eludet the guard he made for the bushe, thance to the George River. As shortly after he wher missed at work, the lighhorse guard wher send out to scout for the Internees, wich they recaptured 3 hours after


[Page 26]

while swimming in the George River, to reach the opposite bank. He returned under guard & placed in the lockup & sentenced the following day to 2 months jail at Darlinghurst. During this month all Internees, formerly residents of Australia wher send by Post by the Authoritys forms "to furnish returns of income for taxcation during 15.16.17.18. The Committee complained about this to the visitor (state Answer.) My return answer has been the following. To the Hon The Minister for taxcation Melbourne. Sir. As I am not in the posession of my private account books, I am unable to state truthfully my income during the year 1914. As I hawe been a Guest of the Federal Governement since January 1915 & interned in a Pris of War Camp, I have not don any manual labor since entering. In consequence I hawe not earned anything however as the food & clothing ration has been so scanty I hawe been compelled, to keep body & soul together, after spending all my personal cashe I had on my arrest in buying additional food & clothing to borrow the summe of £75. Theirfore you will see, during 15.16.17.18. My income has been nill expenditure £195 Signed The Writer.

11/5 A Internee Mûller while in the Camp lockup had only 2 Blankets issued to him at Night. As the Camp regulation provides issued to him at Night. As the Camp regulation provides for 3 blankets, he complained to Police in charge of lockup. He wher taken into isolation Cell & beaten unmercifully. We Internees inside of the Main compound heard the cryes of this unfortunate Internee. To prevent us hearing the crys the


[Page 27]

As told the writer by the asulted Internee shortely after he return out of the hospital.

22/1917. During the afternoon a Lieut with Private Clifford came into the arest Cell. It was about 5.30pm The Lieutenant ordered me into the isolation Cell, wich I obeyed instantly. He told the Private to quiten me, if they could not to [indecipherable] my head off. Shortly after 5 Military Police I recognised Corporal Chesser, Corporal Foote, one nicknamed The Swede & Long Tom or Tiny as generally called, the other unknown. Long Tom came first into the Cell & kicked me into my stomach. I fell to the ground. Then Chesser with assistance handcuffed me on legs & hands. Than they gaged me with the asistance of a broom handle, during the struggle of the gagging I lost 3 front teeth, than the whole Military Police asulted me with hand & feet, than left me bruised all over & nearly suffocating on account of the gag. After a long while, I managed to shift the gag by rubbing same against the wall. When I had my mouth free, I admit I kicked up a bit of a noise, to come to undo my handcuffs. Thereupon the Police came again & asulted & regaged me. During this struggle I broke Corporal Chessers Wristlet Watch, Thereupon he kicked me in the stomach saying I have no more to do with this f – Bastard & walked out, also calling the other police to withdraw


[Page 28]

5 days after I wher admitted to the hospital. I had been inside the Isolation Cell all this time without medical attendance. By this time the outside bruises had mostly vanished, but suffered severe lung trouble, on account my rips hawing being pressed into my lungs during the struggle also I had got several Kicks their by a Policeman's Military boot. I remained inside the hospital for 6 month, & am still weak, as I feel I am not cured properly get. The examination at the hospital wher made by Major Wallace, Doctor Tympsom looked after me while their with the asistant of Orderly Private Giety. I complained about my ill treatement to the following Officials, but without result, Majer Allsopp II in Comand of this Camp. The Internees President Doctor Lohke, The Visitor Justice Harvey & Mr Brittain. U..S.A. Consul. I recieved the verbal answer from Col Major Allsopp. If you recieved this Punishement you deserved it. The doctor at the hospital entered into the Hospital Book Lung trouble". I am still spitting Blood frequently & am very weak.

Kruger 29 comp


[Page 29]

Kruger 29 Camp


[Page 29]

Military Police ceased, however at 8 a.m. they returned again & marched him off to the Soldiers excercise ground ¼ mile away handcuffed, hier they sett upon him & beat him into insensibility & left him laying on the ground handcuffed untill 6 a.m. when he wher picked up by orderlies & 5 days after put into Hospital for treatement wher he remained. On the 20th at 6 a.m. a train load of Internees arrived who had been interned at Trial Bay. This Internees wher mostly of the Capitalistic Class & the Trial Bay Camp wher known to us, as a Good Camp, wher the libertys wher not so rigid, neither was discipline. At 8 a.m. they entered into the newly errected barraks, build on the formerly excercise ground wich however had been had been separated from our Camp by means of a Row of 8 barbwires 7 feet high. The day previously the Authoritys had errected a special structure in front of the Camp Port Office in line wich divides the 2 Camps at 8 a.m.. A machine Gun got carried up in parts & put together also ammunitiones galore. The Gun stood 20 feet high & attendet by a Gunner. I personaly seen the Catridgebelt fully loadet & the Gun ready at Moments Notice to be used, why is a mistery to the Writer as the Handshaking & conversationes between the Internees wher of the happiest. At 9 a.m. the second trainload arrived with Internees of the same Camp of New S.20 previously they wher compelled to go under a close surveilance, also a close search wher made of each Internee also their propertys. The propertys got returned to the Owner 3 days after the arrival. Of the information I personaly with some of those


[Page 30]

Trial Bay Internees I gathered the following: May 18th 60 Guards arrived at Trial Bay & the internees wher informed to be ready for transportation within ¼ hour. The luggage & personal property to be left behind, as their would be Australian Soldiers ordered off to pack same & follow later. To this unreasonable request & order the Internees in a body resolved to refuse but to demand 24 hours time to be ready for transportation. A stormy Meeting between the Camp Comandant & the Internees committee resulted in the Internees hawing their reasonable wish granted: As mentioned previously, mostly all wher of the wealthy Class, they had, to make their internment as bearable as possible build with their own money build a Theater Cino Stadium Peace Hall & several other Structure. The Peace Hall wher 2 Storys high expencively decorated & furniture acordingly. Also a Garden valued by the Governement as per Sydney paper of 1000£ To the Buildings wich wher private property the Internees sett fire same burned to the ground, as the Internees reconed they wher justified in doing so, as it wher private property wich had cost the Internees Money & now unable to take along. Re the Garden the following appeared in the Sydney Press. German help soldiers. A Vegetable garden taxced by experts to be of the value of £1000 with irrigation & cemented Pits hawing being left behind the Internees extra: see account of Daily. When the 24 hours had elapsed, they wher shipped aboard a steamer bound for Kempsey. From their they wher transshiped by 2 trains to this Camp. During the 20 hours journey by train, not a


[Page 31]

bite of food or a warm drink of water got issued to the Internees by the Authoritys. Is it a wonder all wher hungry like Wolfes when they arrived into their new surroundings hier, the New arivals handet money through the fence to Internees on other site to buy food at the shops of our Camp for them. All of course wher greatly surprised to find themselves separated by a Barbwire fence from the main compound & every internees on both camps asked. Why are we separated. "The motiwes for this action by the Military has been never disclosed to any of the Internees, neither to our Camp Committee. The space for the 760 new arivals being about 250 yards long by 130 yards broad inside of this space wher to barraks to house them. So the reader can gues, the space for them wher indeet limited considerably, regarding walking or excersices in general to pass away the weary hours. The following day to provent the Internees of the Main compound to converse with the new arivals another fence about 12 feet from the other one got errected & Soldier guards wher stationed in both Camps, to arrest anyone seen or heard speaking to a Inmate of the other Camp. Several Internees wher put in consequence in the Camp lockup, for tresspassing Camp regulationes ranging from 1 to 5 days. On the Noticeboard of our Camp wher notices put up by the Authoritys signed by the Comandant Hollman warning any Internee in the Main compound to enter into a verbal communicationes with the Internees in the


[Page 32]

New Compound. Any written communicationes to gos through the Censor. Any one caught acting against this order would be severely punished. As mentioned previously every 20 yards a guard got stationed in both Camps along the fence, to see this order being carried out. Several Internees made aquaintance with the Lockup for saying Good morning, to their fellow sufferers on the other side. As I hawe it for shure from good authorities that the New arrivals hawe been sentenced to 14 days close detention for setting fire to their property in Trial Bay camp previous to leaving. However this sentence, neither the reasones for this sentence has never been officaly notified to the sentenced Internees. The Officer – Internees of the Germ Imperial Armee wich had been stationed in China at the outbreak of hostilities & captured by the Japanese, wich wher amongst those New arrivals wher permitted to enter the Main Compound under guard to hawe a warm shower bath every afternoon. As mentioned previously, as this shower bath wher a private concern belonging to 2 Internees they had to pay 2 pence themselves for each shower. They wher not permitted to converse with any Internee of the Main Compound, & as soon as finished they wher led back to their Compound. The rationes issued by the Governement being hardly sufficient to keep body & soul together the Internees in the new Compound wher permitted to buy in the Canteen after the 3rd day of their arival, but only after six p.m. The Canteen got closed to the main Compound & duly open to the Inmates of the New Compound. To gain admittance a race had been made


[Page 33]

through the Barbwire fence leading direkt to the Canteen. The Bakers, Butchers & all private business concerns of our Camp had to deliver the goods ordered by the New Camp at the Canteen during the afternoon, to be taken delivery of at 6 p.m. We inmates of the Main Compound looked upon this harsh treatement meted out to the Newcomers as unjust, becourse they wher entitled to burn their property to the ground, as they could not bring it with them, in prefferance to it falling into the hands of a Governement without compensationes of any sort wich Keeps them Captives, as the Governement would hawe only reaped a certain benefitt of same, as the Daily account of the Garden has proved. So to all Internees this harsh treatement wher unwarrantable & certainly unjust. The reasones why the Trial Bay Internees got shifted at such short notice wher the following. A Trial Bay Internee some months back wrote a letter to his father, wich occupied a high position in the Germ Imperial Service, about being interned in Australia & quatered in a Building wich formerly had been a Penetentiary for Convicts. As this is forbidden by the Hague Convention concerning Pris of War the father sett levers going with Germ Imperial Governement to hawe this state remedied, else hawe reprisals taken. The Germ. Governement insisted to hawe this remedied in Australia at ones, as Internees & Pris of War are not to be treated or housed like Convicts, with the previously mentioned result. As the Germ Governement, if their demand had not been accepted immediately would not doubt as a reprisal hawe Australian Officers


[Page 34]

placed in Germ jails instead a Internement Camps, as this is justified under the Rules of the Hague Convention. Theirfore the quick & urgent transportation to this Camp. The Reader might think How does the Writer know of all this facts, but the reader can rest assured, that the facts are true ones, how they came to my knowledge, is a secret only known to a few Internees.

4 June this day a new ration of foodstuffs got issued to the Camp, wich wher the following/pro Man.Meat or fresh fish 10 ounces daily. Bread 16 ounces daily or Ryflower 12 oz Oattmeal 8 ounces, fresh vegetables including potatoes 8oz tea ½ oz or Coffee 3/4 oz Jam 2oz or margarine 1oz Sugar 2oz salt ½ oz or pepper 1/72 oz Peas 2oz or barley 2 oz or tapioca 2oz or rice 2 oz or sago 2 oz or beans 2oz Condensed Milk 1/20 of a smal tim containing 14 ounces this former wher the daily ration in adition their wher 4oz cheese weekly Signed Holdsworthy June 4th 1918. L. Molloy Major A & I Staff Qmaster G.C.C. This date we had 5 shilling issued to each Internee out of the Conteen proffit fund 6/- 2 pair of axes also a smal towel issued to each Internee, both articles wher of a poor & shoddy quality, in most cases secondhand. 8/ The Internees wich had sellected a Committee in mangarate a exhibition of entirely Camp made products, opened their exhibition today in the so called Skating Ring, a smal hall afterly used as a Private Mowing Picture show. The whole proceeds after necessary expenses being deducted to goe entirely to the Tombstone fund to decorate the Graves of Internees wich had died during their


[Page 35]

internement in this Camp. The exhibits wher grant under the circumstances prevailing hier, hardly any proper tools handy, mostly all made in Camp by the Internees themselves.

The Internees allmost to a Men payd his entrance fee of first day 6 pence 2 3 & 4 day 3 pence for this great & grand cause 9/ 2 Internees managed their escape, by digging a hole in the excercise ground during the day carefully, so as not being detected by the ever watching & alert Military Police & previously to all Internees being called to return to the main compound, they got into the hole & some friends, closed them up with the earth taken out. The aire to keep them alive untill dark, they recieved through a iron pipe. So they remained untill 9 p.m. when as they being at the back of the guard they managed their escape through the only remaining Barbwire easily. As this Camp however is full of Spies payd by the Military Authoritys daily, the Authorities even wher informed. The Authoritys know it the same Night & Light Horse Guards & Soldiers send out in all directiones immediately to search for them. When the Internees reached the River to swim across they found fires lit by the Soldiers gallore. They immediately grasp the situation as an impossibility to effect their escape to regain their freedom, they returned the way they had come & crawled back into the previously mentioned Hohle to await daylight as at 8am the gates of this ground would be opened for the general use, when they could enter the Main Camp again unnoticed wich they also dit reaching


[Page 36]

the barraks at 8.15 a.m. While the Police & Soldiers wher searching for them outside the Barbwire, they wher inside of the Camp & hawing a good laugh at the hoax. 10 a.m. one of them (Bach) wher noticed by the Military Police sitting in one of the Camp Coffees hawing breakfast. He arrested same & placed him in the Lockup, wher he remained 3 days & becourse he had denied allways of hawing escaped he returned to Camp as the Military wher unable to prove the escape, but had sentenced him for 3 days lockup for failing to be On Rollcall. State Newspaper report of glorious capture of the Escapee Barks b the Military Police close to the Camp. 12/2 Internees wher captured at 6 p.m., hawing being given away by Camp spies sitting in this came previously explanted hohle. The Search partie, consisting of 27 soldiers & a Captain, told them to come up and toke same to the Lockup & charged for trying to desert. On this day the Camp wher notified that each Internee would recieve ½ lb of Butter per week instead of jam also little of cheese instead of other food as granted under our food regulationes. All of us Internees saw notice the economy at the Internees expence. President Conc Camp Representation. I would aske you to promolgate to all concerned the following. A That no specified period is layd down for wich clothing issued to Internees is to last with the exception of part worn boots, wich are to last


[Page 37]

5 months. B. No article or garment will be exchanged unless it has seen reasonable time in wear & show proper treatement. C. Boots A A fresh issue of boots will not be made so long as the old pair are fitt to be repaired. D. Before fresh articles of any discriptiones will be issued the old articles of any discriptiones will be issued the old articles must be returned to Store. Signed L Molloy Major. To inform the reader what reasonable time of wear means, as informed me personally at the Camp Ordanance Store by the Military Official in charge Captain Stewart is the following. Overcoat wich is factory made & of inferior quality 3 year Cardigan jacket wich is of wool & Cotton 3 years singlets & boots untill they cannot be mendet. We must buy everything to do the mending with also the material with the exception of soles for the boots, these the Governement supplies is with, however, the rest of the necessary tools we must supply ourself with, or else pay another internee to do it for us. On May 12 we wher notified to safe our jam tins as the jam would be supplied in large tins on the 14th. A wagon droven by a Soldier entered Camp loadet with Kerosine tins containing jam. The tins proved to be in most instances old & Rusty7 both on the out & inside some even had about ½ inch of Kerosine floating on top of the jam. When the company Comanders noticed this, they in a body refused to accept same for our consumption & the waggon left the Maingate with the same quantity as when he entered it. On the 17th also 3 days after this refusal we wher notified by the Military Official


[Page 38]

Molloy per Notice on the Noticeboard that the refused jam had been condemned by the Authoritys as unfitt for human consumption and would be destroyed, however in future each Comp Comander is requested to accept the jam in any receptacle issued wich would be in due course as refusal to accept same, could not claim compensation in case same goes bad again. Theirefore we all went & recieved our jam out of dirty Kerosine tins into our only plate wich we used to carry our dinner on, & so as to not being made ill the majority of Internees dumped same into the Receptacle for rubbish to be carted to Cinarotor the next morning.

We had this jam issued to us in this fashion on 3 suxcesive occassiones when through our Committee hawing constantly complained & send complaining coresponde to the Camp Officials Minister of Deffence Official Visitor Govenor General & our respective Consuls about the unclean state of the issue we had Butter issued us at the rate of 250lb daily to be dividet as the Camp Representation thought fitt amongst 5000 Internees. Therefore each Company toke its turn, 22 7 ounces cheese each Internee wher issued to us, this wher the first issue. 15/6 On account of hawing found a illicit still in a garden house of a Germ Imp Soldier, all the gardens & smal houses wich the Soldiers had used during the day had to be destroyed. So about 300 Internees suffered through the actiones of 2 of their fellow sufferers. I wish hier to state that the


[Page 39]

Military had two Sergeants, in this Camp especially to find ellicit stills, this consisted of their whole duty during the day Allthough they discovered a good few & good many remained undetekted. July2 All internees who had errected huts, between the barraks be it Workshops, Studios or sleeping quarters wher ordered to breakdown or remowe it. However in a few special cases, they wher permitted to rebuild on a specified place & acording to plans & specifications only made by the Authoritys. To each of those lucky onces had to deposit £2.10 for the timber & rubberoid at the Military Office & same got delivered in the Camp. Every other material they had to supply themselves. The buildings wher 9 feet by 9 ground

on of those shops had to be done or payd for by the Internee themselves, also find the tools himself. In a few instances a Internee wher permitted to proccoire the timber & material necessary at a Liverpool timberyard. On this day about 200 Internees of the Trial Bay Compound wher escorted under heavy guard for a walking exercise in the surrounding paddocs, because their Camp wher too smal for the amount interned their. This excnercise toke place over per week. On July 12th The Internees of this


[Page 40]

also Trial Bay Compound forcibly broke the Rule Not to converse with each other. About 20 Internees suffered with arrest, inmates of both Camps & placed in the Lockup on a bread & water diet. Though a few suffered, the Internees gained their object in exchanging words with their fellow Internees. The Guards inside of both fences received Reinforcement fully armed & strict orders to carry out the Rule issued to us. Their wher 500 Internees on one side & about 3000 on the other, however made this impossible. Allong both fences several Internees playd all kinds of instruments or sang german patriotic songs. Some Internees even sang "It’s a long way to Tipparary, but to Berlin is further still, you might get to Tipparary but to Berlin you never will [indecipherable]" a ditto manufactured in this Camp. As a result of the music along the fence of the Main Compound 2 Acordeones & one Bass got confiscated by the Military Police. During this month July our issue of Butter wher very irregular. On some ocassion our issue wher 4-5 days late, we never had those days compensated with more quality, but got the same rationes. Our Butter issue consisted of II grade Butter only ours. All other issue wher uneatable stuff. The Qatermaster called this stuff Margarine but the Internees called it Monkey grease. The difference between this stuff called margarine wher like soap & cheese. On account of this uneatable stuff issue the Camp Represan-


[Page 41]

Germ Concentr. Camp
Holdsworthy

Esteemed Sir.

As I hawe been a resident of Australia for the past eighteen years, though at present interneed in the Commonwealth, I forward you a parcel containing my eight days allowance of Margarine? I humbly aske of you, to hawe "this stuff analysed, to see if it is fitt for human consumption. As I am still a resident of the Commonwealth, I think it only human & right, that I still come also under the Law of "The pure food & drug act. Trusting you see your way clear to grant my request.

I remain Yours respektfully

F Bungardy 41 Comp10 M


[Page 42]

tation wher forced to complain again to the Authorities in charge of the Internees in Australia state all corespondence

Letter of Protest: answer recieved wher Reffering to your recent complaint regarding the issue of margarine you are hereby advised that this particular ration may be either Butter Margarine or lard & you are directed to inform the Committee that ay one of these substances is the authorised ration Sign. R. Hollman Lieut. Col. Com. Conc. Camp Headquaters Liverpool 19 July 1918. The following day the following Notice wher issued to the Internees July 20th 1918. The quatermaster has consented that smal Milktins issued today may be retained by the Internees. The large tins issued today i.e. 4 to each company must be returned. In future all tins large & smal will hawe to be returned to the store. Signed Molloy Quatermaster. 21/ this being Sunday several Internees from Sydney or in the sorounding district wher expecting their usual 14 days visits of their Wifes & Children. To our surprise we noticed the military erecting 6 smal tents. When the visitores arrived & previously to the same being permitted to proceed to wher their Husband wher awaiting them in the Cattle paddoc called visiting ground, they had to enter one of these tents to undergo a close search, the search wher carried out by Lady searcher, who had come out from Sydney special for this occassion under Orders of the Camp Comandant. Mostly all the Wifes of the Internees in most instances Australian born refused to under this barbarous treatements preffered to return home to their homes without seeing their husband, than to humiliate themselves to be treated in the style of a convict. As it is imaginable the Husband Internees returned in a rage, about the actiones of the Government & the Authoritys in charge of Internees expecting their wifes to undergoe this shamefull treatement. The reasones for the Lady searchers, wher unwarrantable, as all the wifes visitores wher Wifes Civilian Internees is not Pris of War, unless the Federal Governement wished to spend some of the War loom uneccessaryly


[Page 43]

During this month 17 Internees managed their escape successfully & are still at liberty. The Officials in charge of us here it wher a mistery how & wher he place was, wher the Internees got past the Senterys unnoticed. The Spies & Informers in our midst wich wher in the constant pay of the Military Camp administration, wher unable at first to disclose the place, however at last they got on the trail, in the shape of another hohle in the Exercise paddoc, dug in by Internees during day times & when not working covered again, so that it wher hardly to notice. In this the Internees crawled shortly before the Gates got closed, friends of same covered them up with dirt & grass, leaving only a smal hohle for breathing purposses. When dark & the Senterys wher stationed around the fences the escapees came out of their hohle 50 yards at the back of the senterys, & crawling over ther ground untill they reached the other single Barbwirefence, wich they soon negotiated, the rest of their Job wher easy. As the Spies of this Camp had informed all this to the Provost Marshall Bardsley, this sayd Gentleman tried to make a smart capture, so on the 17th wich usualy came in to clear the exercise guard at about 5pm. On their return to the Guardhouse, they marched straight to the spotty wich had previously been marked by placing several stones around it by some of the Spies thinking some Internees wher in it again. However no bird was in it, but a letter wher found adressed to the Provost Marshall, containing abusive & insulting statements. The next day about 50 soldiers came in to the excerrise paddoc, with Crowbars, picks, matthooks Rifle & bayonets & searched every insh of the ground, becourse the Informers had heard, that their wher continued every evening at 5pm by guards


[Page 44]

armed with all sort of tools but without results. From the 17t the exercise paddoc, football ground & the Internees private garden opt closed by order of the Comandant, & so we Internees about 5000 wher compelled to remain within our smal & limited compound day & night. 22/ during afternoon & as the rain had ceased for an hour the football players of the Internees turned out for excercise in the middle of our Camp in front of the Open air Mowing Picture Screen. This exercise however turned out a failure, as the ball wher mostly amongst the barraks. To make our confinement harder the Rain sett it on the 19th & remained continualy with the exception of a very limited short space for over a week, in consequense our Camp wher again a sea of mud, so we wher forced again to remain in our 3 by 9 feet space within our sheds, to live, sleep, eat, recreate, & store our luggage in. The Reader can guess, however patience & health has been taxced to the outmost by those in charge of Internees in civiliced Australia. 24/ This morning 2 illicited stills wher discovered by the so called Whiskey Sergeant "One of the stills wher underground, below one of the barraks. On this day we also had our weekly issue of Margarine? "As it wher unfitt for human consumption, mostly all Internees returned same, as it most shurly, as the Physicianes interned in our mids, advised us to refrain from touching it as it most shurly would make us sick, if we eat it. This so called Margarine seemed to be a mixture of Mutton fatt & Coconut Oil. A Comon [indecipherable] candle had a better taste. The following letter has been despatched by the Camp Represantation to the Minister of Deffence Senator Pearch who is in charge of Internees in Australia. GCC Camp Liverpool July 28 Sir! With refference to the new scale of rations dated June 1918 wich inter alia providet for 4oz cheese per man per week we have to inform you that the supply of this article has been very irregular lately. Up to the time of writing


[Page 45]

the following quantities are due to us , [indecipherable] for the last weekend 16th 98lb on the 23rd 1320lb making a totall of 1418lb. This irregular supply has giwen a rise to a lot of discontent, among the Internees, followed by denouncing & abusing the Camp Representation & Camp Comanders two of the later hawing meanwhile resigned for this reason. We wher affordet an opportunity, to bring this regretable state of affairs under the Notice of the Camp Comandant. Major Hollborrow this morning, who on enquiry was told by the asistant Quatermaster that a shipment of cheese was expekted to arive in Sydney today. Unfortunately statements of this nature hawe on various ocassiones been made to us by the A.G.M.C. Departement, but instead of being fullfilled, the Camp was only subjected to more dissapointements. It is for this reasones, that the Internees hawe come so nervous & restless, that we hawe been instructed to aske you to remedy this evil. We take the oportunity again to point out to you, that the margarine now supplied is being detested, the Internees rightiously maintaining that it is not fitt for eating purposse; In order to avoid further corespondence about irregular suplies of cheese & also in order to solve the margarine question, we would like to sugest, if you would kindly induce the Governement to allow us the value of both Cheese & Margarine in money, wich we propose to distribute to the Internees at the end of each week against individual recipts. We respektfully request to giwe our proposal your earnest consideration, as this is our opinion the only way out of the difficulty. Awaiting a favorable reply. We beg to remain Sir respektfully Camp Representation 25/ All camp Comander held a meeting to protest against the issue of the irregulars & bad issue of foodstuffs to us Internees. They deceited


[Page 46]

to see the Comandant, to either hawe our food issue regular or else they would in a body resign. On the following day the 26 /the Spokesman of this Meeting seen the Comandant Hollborrow & layd the general complaints before him for perusal. This sayd Gentleman promised the deputation, that he would do all in his power, to hawe our just complaints remedied, if possible, as it wher not his fault, but the higher authorities, with wich, he would get into telephone communicationes at ones, also promissed to issue orders at ones to the Quarter Master not-to-accept the magarine in future, becourse he must admitt himself, that same wher not fitt for human consumption. To this the Delegates of the Camp. Camanders considered fair & remained in their positiones. 26/ On this day 2 Internees wher recaptured about 180 Miles from this Camp, wher they had gone partly by train, partly by foot. They wher arested at 3a.m. by a Country Police tramping along the Country road, they wher returned heavyly ironed & chained, both on Hands and feet to this Camp wher they arrived on August the second & placed in the Lockup to await trial by court mashial. 28/ The Separation Camp, wher the Trial Bay Internees had been confined, opt transferred to the new Camp, made by Internees about 1000 yards distant. This Camp, as it wher specialy build for the wealthy Internees formerly confined at Trial Bay wher whe much superior, to the main Compound, wher most by the Working class wher Keept. As this month has been mostly allways, Rain our Camp is again a Sea-of-mud, & walking made in consequence very dangerous. On the 29th the eldest Internee died at the Liverpool hospital at the age of 86 years of age, wich had been a resident of Australia for close on half a Century. The deceased


[Page 47]

wher a Blacksmith by trade married to an Australian. He left a grown up family to mourn their loss. He looked on his Internement a strong Man allthough his age wher than 84 years, but he worries & hardships of this Camp, also being naturalised in Australia for the past 30 years, weight-heavily on his mind & during the last 9 months he has been under constant medical treatement. On this day the Official visitor visited the Camp & the Camp Representation requested him to taste the socalled Margarine, with the Gentleman also dit, at the same time, the following letter of protest, wher handet to him by our Camp Represantation: G.C.C. August 9 1918. To the Honorable Justice Mr Harvey Official Visitor, Sir, In continuation of our corespondence about Margarine? We beg to state that our fellow Internees, including our Chiefcooks hawe tried every possible means, to utilise this article, but all agree that it is a mixture of some indefinable ingredients wich make the use of it utterly impossible, let alone it being suitable for eating purposses. Considering that our Men hawe been compelled to be satisfied with the rather finely cut bread ration only for the last 20 days now we again urge upon you the necessity of asking the Authorities without delay to discontinue the supply of this useless article & replace it by a suitable subsistute. We add that the whole Camp distinctly refuses to accept this so called Margarine for the above stated reasones & rightiously expects the Governement to supply an article wich is fitt for human consumption. In view of the urgency of the matter, we hope for a speedy & satisfactory settlement for all concerned & awaiting your reply, four extra Camp Representation Re the Europe Mail: We also complained about the sparcely


[Page 48]

[Newspaper clippings]

German Escapees
Michael Segfried, a German, made his escape from the Holdsworth Concentration Camp yesterday afternoon. The police description of the missing man is 22 years of age, 5ft.8in in height, fair hair, fresh complexion, clean shaven. He is dressed in grey trousers and a blue jersey and cap. And is thought to have with him a blue suit with a fine white stripe.

January 14 1919.

German Escapee Killed
Jumped from Mail Train
Lithgow Saturday

The fates meted out short shrift to Herman Alfred Fisher, about 26 years of age. He was an inmate of Holdsworth Concentration Camp, but escaped on October 16. He was apprehended at Orange, and was returning by the Orange mail train. This morning, when nearing Blackheath, he asked his guard, Private J. Brown for permission to go to the lavatory. Brown removed the handcuffs and let Fisher in. He saw him three miles further on at Medlow Bath, but immediately on leaving Medlow Fisher evidently, attempted to escape as a minute later Brown noticed his absence.

On fettlers starting to work at sunrise, they discovered his mangled body on the railway Outgoing trains had cut him to pieces. He seems to have fallen out just as the up train was arriving at Medlow.

Sunday Times, December II 17

German Escapees
Before Military Court, Darlinghurst Case

Three German internees appeared before a military court at the Victoria Barracks to-day to answer various charges. They were Edward Carre, Carl Seeman, and Louis Becker.

Colonel V. le Gay Brereton was president of the court, and the members were Major Davey and Captain S Spain.

Carre and Seeman were charged with escaping from the Darlinghurst detention barracks on January 2.

Becker, a young man well over 6ft, in height and who chatted and smiled with his "friend" while the proceedings progressed, was charged with escaping from the Concentration Camp at Holdsworthy on December 30, 1918, and with stealing two rings, the property of another internee, Alfred William Terris, on December 28, 1918, or alternatively with having them in his possession, knowing them to be stolen.

The cases against Becker were taken first. He pleaded guilty to escaping, but said that he was not guilty of theft.

Owed Money to Other Internees
Becker, on his oath, said the he did not steal the rings.

Major Bowie Wilson: You owe money to other internees? Yes; about £50.
And you escaped so that you would not have to pay? – Maybe so.
Did you tell anyone you did? – Yes.

Under further cross-examination Becker said that he was employed at the hospital camp. He made a few shillings by purchasing cigars and tobacco from the soldiers and retailing them to other internees at a small profit.
Major Wilson: You were running a cigar and tobacco business in the camp? Hardly that: I was making only a few shillings out of it – about 2s on each box. Becker added that on one occasion Terris had said to him that he could get a couple of men to swear anything he liked for him.

Afraid to go back
The court, after a short retirement in regard to the theft charge, resumed.
On the charge of escaping Becker said he had nothing to say.
It was stated that a guard saw Becker walking along a road near the camp, and as he did not have a pass he was arrested. Becker said then that he was afraid to return to the camp, as he owed £50 to the other internees.
Other evidence shoed that Beck had been interned four years and two months.
The court ordered the return of the rings toTerris.
The findings of the court were sent to the confirming authority.
The case against Carre was then taken. He said that he did not desire anyone to assist him.
When the charge was read to him Carre said: "I plead guilty," and added: "I am let out of my cell by another prisoner of war Shellock, with a key made of hoopiron.. He opened my cell and Seeman’s cell. He said he had looked into the matter, and that the door of the observation wing was not locked. We three went down into the yard. Shellock went away, and came back with Reiser and some blankets. We went to the tower. Shellock went first. He took the blankets and made some ropes, and pulled us up. Shellock then left, and we went, too."

Had Escaped Previously
A statement showed that when the military police were interviewing Seeman after arrest Carre said, "The game is up – what is the use of telling a pack of lies?"
Carre’s record sheet disclosed that he had escaped twice before, and had also been guilty of other offences, including stealing.
Seeman also pleaded guilty to a charge of escaping. He is a lightly-built, flaxen-haired youth of short stature, and is credited with remarkable strength. He availed himself of the services of an interpreter.
Seeman’s statement to the court was similar to that of Carre. He said that when Shellock aroused him in his cell he added. "Hurry up, make haste, we have no time to lose."
Seeman’s record showed that he had escaped once previously, and that he had been convicted of stealing Government property.
The sentences of the court, both in regard to Carre and Seeman, were sent to the confirming Authority.


[Page 48]

[newspapers cuttings – not transcribed]


[Page 52]

arrangements arrival & distribution of mail from Europe, becourse we persume, that the main reason in its delay is the Censorship at the Censor depot Sydney. (State the view of the Paper). On the 7th August the Camp Representation recieved the following corespondence. To the President G.C.C. Liverpool Sir. I have to aknowledge the reciept of your communication of the 1inst & the copies of the corespondence attached thereto with the Comandant of Camps concerning the irregularity of supply & of the unsatisfactory quality of certain ration for Internees & desire to inform you that represantation as requested are being made to the Deffence Departement Melbourne in the Matter. You will be duly advised of the departemental reply on this conditiones. I remain respektfully Max Rutty Acting Consul for Swizerland. Similar corespondence wher recieved from the Swedish Consul concerning the Complaints of the Austrian Internees. The wearing appearal issue wher as formerly mentioned, being scarce & inadequate to Internees & on account of the Winter season now setting in, those without means are compelled to run allmost naked or very scanty clad. Some even hawe made out of their blankets or shirt or pair of trousers to cover their body & so keep the cold out. This last venture however got stopped when an elderly Internee quatered in the Old Mens Compound recieved 28 days Lockup for destroying Governement Property. This old Internees wher send to Darlinghurst Jail. About this time 3 Internees who had escaped out of hole in exercise paddoc wher recaptured in Brisbane, Queensland about 800 Miles


[Page 53]

from hier & wher another recaptured in Sydney about 20 Miles in the other in a Country place 45 miles away. Those arrested in Queensland after awaiting trial by Curtmarshial in the Darlinghurst jail I wher put into Singh Singh to prevent him escaping again the other two to 28 days Darlinghurst Jail. All the others also recieved 28 days Darlinghurst Jail & returned into Camp after being compelled to giwe the word of Honor never to try to escape again. 13/ On this day an Austrian Internee got released to attend & look after his children. About 2 weeks ago this Internee recived communicationes that his Wife layd seriously ill & not expekted to live. This Internee applied for permission to visit his Wife under guard before it was too late. This however wher refused by the Camp Authorities. When this Internees got informed that his Wife had died, he applied to be permitted to go to b be present at the funeral, wich also got refused. Now their the Wife has been burried for over a week. He wher told by the authoritys to return to his Children to protect them & to see that they didn’t want. "Another instance of the treatement meted out to Internees in case of dead in their families. A Internee 56 Years of age, a farmer living at Temoora N.S.W. born in Australia recieved telegram that his daughter, aged 28 years & married, lay dying. He applied for permission to goe & see her under guard. This request got refused by the Comandant. When he recieved a telegram to his daughter had died, & would be burried on a certain date, he applied for permission to be present under


[Page 54]

guard if necessary at the funeral, also this request has been refused. A person interned in this Camp, can notice to wich dirty actiones, deterimental to humanity & Civilication or Governement is able to stoope down to, to affect their unknown,persones reasones & purposses. The worst of it all is, that the spite used, affects Civilian Internees, only about 180 are Governement Imperial Soldiers, taken from the H.M.S. Emden & from China. This The majority of the Internees Citizens of same in some instances even since birth at the comencement of hostilities in Europe in 1917. As a punishment of their Birthright their wher herdet together [and] treatened worse than Criminals. And that in a Civilicat country, wich boasts of a flag wich has allways lectured on Fairplay & Justice. "I hawe allways expected to find civilication & humanity in Australia, but since my in ernement, I hawe noticed that this is foreign to the Federal Governement of Australasia, else he would not submitt to transactiones, as have been narrated truthfully previously & to follow in this book, I leave it to the readers themselves to judge if I am justified in saing so or not. At the end of hostilities I am positive that the majority of the formerly residents of Australia, will demand their repatriation to enable them to shake the dust of Australia of their boots never to see it again. In some instances the family, all australian born, will accompany them to another part of the Globe. As Australia is thinly populated


[Page 55]

this inconsequence will be deterimental to the Australian Governement, as the old but true adage is. Children are the best assett to any state. My experience, fair during my four years of australia internement has proven, that Justice & fair play only excists in words, but seldom in deeds hier. 18/ Kaiser Karl, Emperor of Austria hawing his Birthday, this event got celebrated by the Internees in General suitable to the occasion. The day comenced with Reveile at 6 a.m. by selectiones played by the Camp Brass Band. 10a.m. high Mass in the Catholic Church, an old ragged tent, supplied by the Federal Governement, Vater Jerger, an wich had arrived in childhood days in Australia & lerned & studied his Proffession (Priest) in Australia wich however also had been interned by the Authoritys held officiated at the High Mass. During the afternoon from 2.50 clock wher a happy gathering in the Turn Halle with Coffee & Cakes supplied by the Austrian Internees from 7-70.30 p.m. Concert Vaudeville & Speeches combined in the Austrian Hall. The Hall wher gaily decorated with greens & bunting Austrian Oak, wher substituted by Australian Waddel (state acount of Daily) No butter neither substitude has been issued to us for the past 5 weeks. On the 25/ their was a general meeting in the Austrian Hall, to select a Committee to aproash the Comandant, with regard of the Canteen – funds being used for illegal & improper use, & only for the benefits of Internees solely, as the Orders of the


[Page 56]

Hague Convention predicts. A Committee wher selected but previously same could take steps as ordered by the Internees, they wher ordered to park, their belongings for transference into the Trial Bay Compound. My experience wile hier has proven, that whenever, the Camp insist to hawe a case remedied, no matter how justified same may be, the leaders wher soon separated from this Camp, if he belonged to the wealthy class, he wher transferred into the Trial Bay Compound, if he belonged to the Working class he wher interned in Singh Singh under the charge of entering into actiones, deterimental to the good conduct of the Camp. During this time the following Claims wher forwardet to the Officials in charge of this Camp Notice Claims against the Comonwealth Governement for alleged loss or damage to Luggage, personal belongings & Parcels. A large number of claims hawe been considered by the luggage board & in order to reach some finality it is hereby directed that any Internee, who alleges that he has a claim, as above mentioned & had not allready submitted to such claims shall forthwith submitt his claim in writing to the Secretary Departement of Deffence. All such claims must be submitted before the thirtieth day of Sept 1918 & after that date no claims will be entertained for any loss or damages wich occurred prior to that date. Any Internee who has allready submitted his claim is not to submit the same again. No notice will be taken of any claims resubmitted. Signed R.C. Hollman. Needless to say that claims wher send in gallore, & if every Internee


[Page 57]

recieves a just consideration of his claim & gets payd for the loss Australia will be sadly in need of another Warloan. At the end of this month another tunnel wher discovered in the Singh Singh compound. Several Inmates wher in consequence put into Irones & placed in the Lockup, previously to their deportation on the following day to the Darlinghurst Jail to await their trial by courtmarshial for trying to escape. During the last 2 months the Provost Marshall hier Bardsley has released several out of Singh Singh Compound to enter the Main Compound under promisse, that they would do secret spying "for the Military Police. He also had a few in his Confidence, wich wher inhabitants of the Main compound who spied & reported any harmless actiones noticed, even if some dit not act against the good discipline of the Camp, they wher against Camp Rules. Some wher payd in some instances per diem, some for their information acording to value. Several Internees, who had a priveledge granted them hawe been aproached by this Gent & offered the job of Spy. If they refused, the priveledge wher taken away from them. In one instance, a Internee has forwardet a sworn declaration of Complaint, of the actiones of the Provost Marshial to the Head Authoritys, without result. Needless to say those spies acted very cautiously & secretly, else if found out, their lifes would not hawe been worth a penny each, for the element of this Camp would hawe dealt with them, as a traitor to his country. On many ocassiones this Provost Marshial turned the law into


[Page 58

improper use and send Internees to Jail for disciplinary actiones, wich should hawe been punished by arrest only in the Lockup, acording to the Camp Rules & Regulationes. On Sept 5th . A spy wher cought red handet by another Internee, when this Internee acused him of spying, the Spy hit him over the head with a stone causing a ugly wound, also bit him in the cheek. When the other Internees, wher informed why the row had started, they sett upon him, but lucky for the Spy, the Military Police wher soon on the Scene, & toke him out of the Camp for protection. The Internee who had caught him, & account of his wounds wher transferred to the Hospital. The following day all company Comanders wher called before the Provost Marshall & told to notify all Inmates under their Comand, that if any fighting would again take place the Mashin Gun would be sett in motion. On the noticeboard wher the following Notice Sept 6th 1918. All fighting between Internees will be in future severely punished Bardsley Provost Marshall. This notice issued gawe the Spys selected by the Provost Marshall all the protection to do their dirty work for this Provost. On the 4th following wher send to the Camp Representation for perusal, by the provisional Camp Ballot Committee in charge of selecting a New President: The Camp Officer to be filled by the forthcoming election will be those of 7 Committee Men & 2 Auditeres whilst the Camp secretary will be appointed by the New Camp Representation out of Candidates nominated to the Camp Represantation for that office. The Secretary will be payd by the Military authorites, as hertofore & will hawe a deliberate voice


[Page 59]

only. The auditores will be acting in an honorary capacity. Candidates for the position of Auditores will be nominated by the Camp but only those will be illigable who will be aproved by the present election Committee. Payment or otherwise of the Members of the Camp Represantation will be left to the decission of the Camp, such decission to be expressed on the voting paper. If a remunberation is deceidet upon its decission to be expressed on the voting paper. If a remuneration is deceiddet upon it must in no instance be payd but of military funds. Mode of electiones. The 7 Committee men & the 2 Auditores will be elected by the Camp on the principle of one Man one vote. The voting paper will be devidet into 3 sectiones (A) Camp Committee: No.1 6 general representation, who must hawe full command of the German languages. No 1 representative of Croationes. B 2 Auditores. C Payment of Comittee members 1) No pay 2) 1sh per day 3) 2sh per day. A voting paper is only valid, if it shows the names of 5 candidates. Under AI the name of each Candidate under A 2 nominated by the Croatiens Austrians) Candidates for A & B will be ellected by single majority; in case of a tie lots will be drawn. Only such Candidates who hawe full comand of the German language are eligible for the position of President. Of these the one who obtained the largest Number of Votes is elected president of the Camp Represantation providet that at least two thirds of all the valid votes cast are in his faver. If he has not obtained this 2/3 majority of votes, a second ballot is to be held. 7 days after the first ballot between him & the Committee Member who polled the next highest number of votes.


[Page 60]

The election is to be held in the Turn halle Saturday the 7 September 1918. The hours will be made known as soon as possible. The returning Officer is Mr Marguardt. Nominations must be in writing & must contain the full name & company & mess of the candidate & the person who nominated him, & must be endorsed by the candidates in the presence of a wittnes who must also sign his Name & adresse. It must further be clearly stated on the nomination paper wether the nominated person is a candidate for the Comittee (section 1 or 2) or for the position of auditor. Nomination papers may be handet personaly to the returning officer, or may be put into a box providet for that special purposse at Niets fruit shop. Duration of Committee: Members of the Camp Represantation & Auditores are ellected for the terms of 6 months. Retiring Members & Auditores are elligible for reellection. In case a member resign or does not fullfill his duties for a period of longer than a month, the defeated candidate who polled the next highest numbers of votes automatically takes his place. In case of absence of the president the member of the Committee who is next voting strength takes his place providet that he has full comand of the German language. Rights & duties of Committee Members. The Camp administration & Representation will be devidet on the following general lines. A. Representation & Supervision. (President B Rationes & Kitchens C financial matters (Canteen Camp funds Invalid funds. Comfort & Comfort funds German & Austrian Governement assistance ectra


[Page 61]

D. Sanitary arangements Hospital Dentist Treatement of Patients & Invalids Latrines E Sports Theater Music, Shools Libraries Gardens works tuition entertainements ectra. F Complaints Clothing Post Rank Censorship ectra. The President is the Speaker for the Committee, but in all negotiationes with the Authoritys he must be acompanyd by the Committee Member who is competent & responsible for the matter under discussion. Committee Meetings Meetings of the full Committee are to be held at least ones a forthnight & a report on the liberation of such Meetings, signed by the President & Secretary is to be posted on the Noticeboards regulary & punctualy after the Meeting.
Audit The Auditores will make a full audit of the Camp books & Funds & of the Canteen balance sheets once a month & report to the Camp every month by notice posted on the Camp Noticeboards. Public Notification all these are subject to the aproval of the Camp president, but against his decission the Internee mayappeal to the Camp Intelegence Officer. Camp Meetings: At the written request of at least 1/10 of the total Members of Internees, the Committee must call a general meeting. Company Commanders are not to interfer & the Committee is not to induce such interference in Camp matters with the exception of the administration & distribution of clothing & rationes to their respektive companies. By the Order of the Camp Committee. This Notifications wher handet to the Comandant for perusal & sanction of same but it returned all marked – crossed out & not accepted by same, the following wher written at the bottom in Ink by


[Page 62]

the Provost Marshall Bardsly: Each Internee will be supplied with a painted printed Ballot paper by his Company Comander Returning Officer must hawe 75% of the whole selection to Mr Kolbe will be deputy returning Officer. To this the Ballot Committee send the following reply: To Major Hollborrow Camp Commandant Sir! Reffering to the Interviews we had with you & with Captain Fitzhardinge today & reffering to your orders regarding the Rules for the forthcoming election, we beg to lodge this protest aganist the following decissiones giwen by you.

No 1 That you deny the Camp the right to decite upon the question of payment or otherwise of its representative Comittee & upon the source from wich such payment if any is to be drawn. No 11 That you declare that the election will not be recognised by you as valid if less than 75 percent of the whole of the Internees record their votes. & No 111 that in case of the ellection being declared valid by fo you for the reason sett out in the foregoing section, you will appoint a person or persones to conduct the internal administration of the Camp No 4 that a Military Officer will be present to supervise the ellection & counting of votes No 5 that the nominationes must be put into a special box at the Pay office, to be opened their by one of your Officers in the presence of the returning officer apointed by this Committee. If the supervision of the election as Sett out sub (4) to (5) wher not against all preceeding in history of electiones of this Camp, we would hawe well coined it, as we hawe certainly nothing to hide or to ear. So far it has unfortunately resulted in the resignation of the returning Officer, Mr Marquardt, for whom


[Page 63]

we shall hawe to find a substitute, but as matters stand, your decission means a direct expression of suspicion against the Members of this Committee besides involving a doubt of the integrity of the returning officer. In spite of this we have considered it our duty to the Camp to remain in office, pending an appeal to the Hon. Mr Justice Harvey to whom we shall forward the copy of this letter. We also protest the remarkable fact, that Dr Lohde, though he & his staff had allready resigned at the time whas in position to anounce in the Camp your decission sub (2) & (3) allready the day before yesterday, whilst they wher not communicated by you to the election Committee untill today. Regarding the separate representation of the Croatianes on the Camp Committee, wich you refused me & very large sectiones of Internees, who appointed us, are of this opinion that this concession would only hawe been a fair & reasonable one considering the language difficulty. With respekt of the carrying on of the buisness of the Camp Representation we made an offer to the Provost Marshall last Sunday through Mr Kersten, to the effect, that in case the late Comittee should refuse to carry on, we would though reluctantly assume charge of the routine buisness. We herewith repeat this office becourse complaints are being made in this Camp that the buisness is not being carried on. We request your permission to publish this letter on the Camp Noticeboard. Remain your faithfully The Ellection Committee signed A Kersten. PM Marquardt. P.M.Baerwald. Dr Ginselbush. K Forster. M Preston. This letter of protest wher handet by the Ballot Committee on


[Page 64]

September 4th 1918, the Comandant Hollborrow, who however refused to change his decission regarding the election but answered that the Rules for the forthcoming election would be issued by the military Authoritys. To the Committee forwardet the letter on to the Official Visitor The Honorable Mr Justice Harvey. The request to hawe permission granted to publish this letter on the Camp Noticeboard hawing being refused, the committee toke secret ways to inform every Internee of the Contents in hawing over 40 copys typwritten & handet one to each Company Comander to pass it on from Mess to Mess for the Internees perusal. As the reader will see how we wher oppresed n the sellection of the Committee, although the Rules & Regulations issued by the General Govenor Mr Mauro Ferguson in the Name of the King waranted us this Right. Butter & Cheese issue very irregular, cheese being now 17 days overdue. On the 10/ we wher issued terms by the Military re governing the ballot of the Committee (State Rules issued). On the 14/ wher the day of the ballot, as this ballot wher contradictory to our Camp rules as stated previously only 28 Internees voted out of 5000 & those 28 Internees only voted as an hoax in hawing Names written on the ballot paper of some well known Camp – lunatic, the majority wher for Aunt King Frank & some for Ginger, two Internees who had to be under treatement in a Lunatic Asylum, instead of being left unattendet in our midst. 14/ State notifications of our Deputy Comptroller in answer to a letter of complaint send by the Ballot committee regarding the exhorbitant prices of the Canteen & the Canteen funds. On the


[Page 65]

16/ The Military Police toke 23 Internees out of this Camp, mostly wher of the wealthy class for internement into the Trial Bay compound. This wher mostly the Internees, who had instigated the selection of this new Committee, as our former Committee, who should consist of 10 Members, only 3 members wher in the Committee when they started the New Selection speeches, the other 7 Committee Members, hawing, through being prevented by the Military Authoritys from working in the Camp Interest only resigned. The remaining 8 members the president Secretary & one Ctee Men went to sleep, as far as the Camp wher concerned. Ones the Ballot Comitee remowed notification wher issued to this Camp & signed by the Provost Marshall Bardsly wher to the following effect. Agitationes of any sort against the Committee, will be punished as the Committee of the 3 Internees hawe been selected as the Camp Represantatives by himself. As those 3 Committee Men had previously resigned, the Internees of the Compound refused to look upon this Committee, as their represantives. During the afternoon the Austrian Internees in a body proceedet to the Camp Office & compelled the secretary wich was also a Austrian to come out & cease from his position, or else accept a trashing as they refused to remain under this Committee, if the Provost had put it in power or not, they preffered to be without a Committee & let the Federal Governement do with us what they thought fitt untill & after our release, when we could voice our opinion of the treatement recieved at the


[Page 66]

hands of the Federal Governement of Australia. To this opinion also the German Internees sighted sidet & requested the President to cease instantly his posstion. So from this date their has been no Committee in this Compound. The Military will be held responsible for all happenings within this Compound, becourse they toke the Rights away from the Internees, in shoosing their Camp representation, as they thought fitt, acordding to the Rules issued to the Australian Prisoners of War interned in Australia. This President, Secretary & 1 Committee Men could never represent honestly 5000 Men with satisfaction to the majority, as during the past they hawe certainly failed & so cannot be trusted with this responsible position in the futher. The Provost Marshial reigned like a [indecipherable] over this Camp, & shurly he used his Uniform for his own protection, & also to make us Internees tremble as he most shurly wher possed of a Hate towards all us Germans. On the 16th a report wher issued of Captain Griffiths death in the Sydney Daily Papers, this Officer has been second in Comand to this Camp from its commencement untill 1916 when the present Officials toke charge; this Official has been killed on the West front (France) by a German bullet. As this Officer had giwen the order to shoot if any Internee tried to mowe after the Internee had been told to "Halt in consequence the first Internee got shot in this camp young Ahrendt, as Narrated in any book its commencement, their wher great yoy amongst the Internees, especially as this respektive Official had not left a friend who


[Page 67]

ever had esteemed him in this Camp. This Officer had looked for trouble with the Internees whenever possible & indeet had made our Internement life allmost unbearable. During his reign hier the Lockup wher allways overfilled & I am allmost shure, that if this gentleman had not died at the front, some of the rough element confined in our midst would hawe acted with revenge for certain to had would hawe taken his life sooner or later. While in charge of this Compound this sayd Official wher well awhere of the stated facts & when Entering the Compound, wich wher very seldom he generaly wher surroundet by all the Military Police procurable also a few Guards fully armed. As the new Trial Bay Compound, known under Camp No 4 wher vastly superior build than Compound No 1, on account of the Federal Governement making two classes of its Internees vie the wealthy & the working Class, allmost all the wealthy ones, wich wher amongst our midst applied for transference ti the trial bay compound, wich in most cases got granted. On the 19 October 1918. This compound had its first issue of 1/3 lb american lard instead of the Butter ration as issued per scale, or substitute. Neither Butter or a substitute has been issued to this Camp since the middle of May, with the exception of a few times when the horrible stuff under the Name of Margarine manufactored in Sydney N.S.W. Australia got issued


[Page 68]

when the result as formerly stated. On this evening the Camp Inmates heard 2 sharp shots fired between 9-10pm. This caused as usual great excitement to allmost all men in the direction wher the reports had come from. Hier they found 3 Internees sitting beside the inside of the Wirefence, covered by the Guard on sentery duty on the other side with his rifle. 2 of those Internees wher Australian born while the other wher a German. About 20 Military Police arrived & escorted same to the Lockup waiting for transportation to the Darlinghurst Jail to await their trial by Courtmarshial. On the writer making closer enquiries of this escape he has come to the following conclusion. 7 Internees wich wher disgusted with the treatement recieved by the Authoritys in charge of this Camp, & wished to try an escape to get a change of this monotious mode of life even if they wher unsuxcessfull the would get the [indecipherable] in Camp desired trip to Darlinghurst Jail, wich allthough a Jail & under Jail Rules wher far superior to the Rules as dealt out to us Internees. When those 7 came in indian file close to the fence, the guard noticed &* challenged them to Halt, at the same time firing two shots in the air for asistance. Four of those would be escapees thinking the guard fired to kill as usual they turned & run as fast as they could, to get out of harms way. So the four remained in our midst wile the other three wher sentenced to 28 days Darlinghurst Jail. During this week, the Camp inmates suffered heavily with Infleuzer & in consequence the Hospital wher overfilled, patients had to occupy the floor space


[Page 69]

of each ward, as the beds wher all full. A Mess Mate wich had been carried by the Ambulance from this Camp to the Hospital gawe me the following experience. As the Hospital wher crowded both beds & floor space, he had been put into a military tent wich had been errected to receive patients. The Medical doctor visited each Internees once per diem, in the meantime Noncomissioned Officers wher in charge of them wich attendet them during the rest of the day. As they belonged to the ambulance Corps & Soldiers, receiving 8.35 per diem, they only attendet in most cases their duty when the Ross (the doctor) wherabout, any other time the patients wher neglected. So as not to remain under their care too long the Ambulance orderlies, seen to it, that the food rationes wher very sparcely & fine cut dealt out to the patients, as when they wher hungry & able to crawl they would demand, to be permitted to return to the Main compound wich in most Cases got granted. The food consisted for every sick Internee wich wher bedridden of 2 smal slices of bread & milk, wich consisted of 1 part condensed Dairy Milk & 3 parts of Water. If they wher convalecent they would receive the ordinary Camp food. Although the Doctor ordered in a few instances, that the patients should receive eggs, to build up his constitution, never recieved same, untill a patient had complained to the doctor, when those who wher ordered egg diet recieved I egg per diem. It has been proven that the orderlys withheld the eggs for their personal


[Page 71]

Barbwire, hawing their own Kitchens & washing Place, also the big Austrian Hall. Allthough the camp wher suroundet by barbwire, the M Gate remained open both day & Night so we Internees could mingle still as previously, only Austrians had their Barraks apart from the Germans. As the totall of the Austrians amounted to 1600 they wher better off than we Germans & the dozend Turks, as we remaning 3500 had 2 Kitchens 1 Washing place & 1 Coldshower bath, while the Austrians had 1 Kitchens 1 shower bath & 1 Water Closets. On the 14th this month a young Internee (F Glow) lost his reason. This lad of 25 years of age, wich had been taken of an american Sailing ship on its arrival in Sydney by the authoritys in 1919. As he had been employed in the Quarry close to the Camp, as general worker for 1 Sh per half day work, he aquired the knowledge, how to use dinaniyt dynamite. Lately he had kept himself away from everybody & could allways be noted to walk about either brooding or speaking to himself. Half of the Nights he wandered abut Camp: If asked by the Police, why he wasn’t in his barraks, he answered I cannot sleep. During the morning of this date, he returned to his Men at 4am and layd in his Bunk. About 1 hour later, he awoke another Internee wich sleept below him & put an unprintable proposition before him, with the advice "I’l give you 5 minutes time to consider it, else I’l blow your head off. As Glow returned to his Bunk, the Internee spoken to, dit not take any further notice knowing, that his mind was unhinged. But


[Page 72]

shortly after, he felt something striking his head; thinking it to be a smal pice of wood, he priked it up & throw it outside the Barrak, when to his surprise, he hear a lant suport similar to a shot out of a Rifle. This awoke the rest of the Mess, Mates. One of them wher a former Member of the well known Emden, & when this sayd Sailor rose his head from below the blanket, he felt a heavy blow over his head, wich momentaryly stunned him. Glow wich had been sitting in his bunk, & when seeing that the Dynamite cap thrown down on top of his Mate had explodet outside & this sailor raising his head, to view wher the report had come from, this lunatic had dealt him a heavy blow over the head. Then he layd down, saying I’l blow myself up. Before any Inmates could do anything another report soundet inside of his Bunk. As he still had the stick in his hand, the Mess mates toke this away from, when they found him bleeding from the side of the body. The straw of his Mattresse had been flying all over the Mess. Shortly after the second report, the Military Police arrived on the Scene. They entered the Mess & dealt him two blows over the head with the butt end of the Revolver. As Glow wher then insensible they put the handcuffs on him, & carried him to the Main gate, wher they put him on the ground & awaited him to regain conciousnes. As he resisted again to be taken to the Lockup, he recieved another blow from Cheesers Revolver butt, wich wher a Military Police & afterwards


[Page 73]

promoted to a warrant Officer. This blow again knoked him, into insensibility from the gate the Police carried him then to the Police Station & thence to the Lockup. When the police made enquiries they found 2 plugs of gelignite, some Caps & Powder in his Bunk, wich he had taken away, while at work in the Quarrys. It has been proven that the article he throw on his mate below, had been a detonator, also with a detonator he had tried to blow himself up with. This instance shows, how careless the Authoritys had looked after this most dangerous article. With this, as found in his Bunk this Idiot had sufficent charge, to blow up a whole Barrak & Kill 100 of his fellow Internees. This Idiot wher tried after by court marshiall & sentenced to 12 months jail. I am unable to state the charges layd against him by the Officials in charge of this Camp. To the writers opinion as this Man, as he wher not responsible for his actiones as his reasones had left him should hawe been send to a Lunatic Asylum instead of the Long Bay Jail wher he has to serve his sentence. During the same afternoon about 180 Married Internees, who had been employed Roadmaking about 4 miles distant & had been quatered in a separate Camp, close to the work returned to the Main Compound, becourse a Sergeant in charge of the Soldier guard, had reported to his superior Officer 180 Huns & 12 Guards "Sir" on 3 different ocassion during the day. The Internees resented in being called Huns


[Page 74]

but to be either termed as Internees, Prisoners of War or Germans. The Internees demandet to be termed as entered in the Camp books, Workers by this sergeant, but refused to be called Huns. As the sergeant insisted in calling them Huns, they in a body downed tools & returned to Camp. During this month our issue of butter wher american lard. Also the Authoritys issued to each internee the summer clothing comprising of white linen trousers with 2 inch brown stripe down the leg part & a Coat of same material with 1 foot square braun diamond at the Back. In fact this suit looked indeet like convicts garb why the federal Governement has gone to the unecessary expencess, to hawe the brawn stripes sewn into the wearing appearal, as the Manufactor & contracter will hawe certainly payd for the extra work. In addition to the suit we recieved a coarse shirt & a linnen Hat. 17 October 1918 A Internee (Heine) a Nuturaliced Australian (Heine) wich had been a resident of Australia for the past 14 years, & wich had been in buisness as Hairdresser & tobacconist in Melbourne since his arrival in the Comonwealth, recieved this day Notice from the Military that his Wife, wich wher english born but had arrived during her childhood days in the Comonwealth had died in October 7th at her residence in Melbourne. As Melbourne is 665 Miles from this Camp, & a daily Express train runs from their to Sydney, also wich has a telephonic comunication with this Camp, it toke the Notice 10 days to reach hier. A short time ago, another Internee (Sholz) wich was also married to an englishe Wife recieved recieved Notice, that his Wife had been transferred to the lunatic Asylum six months previously. Another Internee (Ziemendorg)


[Page 75]

wher informed through friends that his Wife Australian born of Australian parents had been taken to the lunatic Asylum Brisbane. In the later instance, the military authority failed alltogether to notify this Internee of his Wifes sad plight. Shurly this experiences do not corespond with the much boomed British fair play & justice. The Internee Shalz recieved shortly after with this notification, notice to pack up as he would be released. On Parole to Brisbane Queensland his former home. This came as a surprise to him, as he had never recieved reply to any corespondence adressed to his Wife during the past six months. When this Internee arrived in Brisbane he found his 7 Children in care of a kindly neighbor, wich had recieved the usual 2/6 per week for each child from the Deffence Department. This notification the writer has personaly from the released Internee in a secret comunication, while still in Camp. On the 16th the first Searchlight wher used from the Newly constructed Observation tower about ½ mile away from this Camp. This tower wher of Troubuild with wooden foundation & 96 feet high, entirely build by Internees at the daily rate of 4sh per diem. 25. On this day the Camp wher notified of extra news, as issued in the Sydney daily, reporting that Austria had made peace. This wher the most wellcome news recieved in this Compound. In consequense of hearing this glad tiding a young Internee 26 years of age (Uchtmann) colapsed, & turned of a bluish Collor instantly. By the time the Military ambulance arrived & toke the unfortunate Internee to the Hospital, life wher extinct. This Internee had been interned for the period of over 3 years, as indeet it was a sad


[Page 76]

ending to such a young life. On the 8 of November the usually daily Grain arrived, blowing the steam whistle all the way joyously to the Camp gawe the Internees their beleave that armistic News wher true, becourse the daily News had been of such unreliable nature, that the inmates of this Camp would not beleave any news prited their [indecipherable] This time the Engineer reported Official News of Armistice & Peace with Germany. The reader should think this News would hawe brought happiness & joy in this Compound. However the usual life wher continued with the exception of a few instances Becourse the majority would not still beleave the report as true, becourse as formerly stated, Didn’t the Newspapers hawe been printing falsehoods allmost daily during the 4 years of our internement. Falsehoods wich in several instances had enabled us, to rise Hopes only to find out to our dismay, it remained only a Hope. 13/ This day wher an official Public holiday all over Australia, proclaimed, to celebrate the signing of the armistic by Germany. Upon this notification, we Internees wher shure, that our life in this Black Hohle, of Australia would seen be endet. The Camp Brass Band gawe a selection at 6am in honor of the occasion. The Camp & the life theirein, wher however as usual. 15/ A sergeant employed in the Censor departement wher arrested, as I hawe it of good authority charged with embessling money send to Internees from overseas. The amount involved amounts to about 2000 £. There is a smal hope for the Internees, to ever hawe this money refundet by the Authoritys, although an order has been issued that all Internees, wich hawe been notified from overseas of the sending of asistance in money, but had not recieved same to giwe in their names at the Post Office departement. On the 18th a detective arrived from Adelaide South Australia & interviewed separately each Internee from that respektive state. The reasones for this interview is known only to the


[Page 77]

Authorities. We wher asked questiones regarding. When we entered the Commonwealth, if we had been a passenger or one of the Crew of a Ship. Of we had been discharged or escaped from this ship. If we wher married or single. If married name & address of the Wife, also State the number of Children & ages (if any) Day of our birth & place & Country. If we had lost any property while in the detainement Camp, if any lost we had to giwe him a list of all lost property. 29 On this day, the following notice wher issued to this Camp. From this day 2 pennys halfpenny will be charged on all post & parcels, signed Mullins, sergeant in charge of Canteen of the G.C.C. This is contradictory to the Rules of the Hague Convention. However what do the Authoritys care about this scrap of Paper "Internee wher & still are robbed most openly, only to enrich someone. The Camp rumor has it, that this charge is made, to make up for the 2000£ wich wher lost through the inhonest action of the Sergeant awaiting trial, formerly mentioned. On the 23/ each Internee recieved 5sh out of Canteen fund. The total cash in hand by the Authoritys in charge of the Internees recieved out of the surplus proffit out of the Camp Canteen amounted to October 1918 to 5200 £ etc the not proffit per month showed during October to be 500 £ the reader can guess, that exhorbitant prices wher charged us Internees for necessary comodities & tobacco. I wishe also to state hier, that with Internees in the hospital & all Invalids & Internees over 50 years of age recieved 2/6 per week out of this Canteen fund. Also the free open air Cinograph wich showed 3 times per week, giwing 2 new programs per week, also wher payd out of this fund, also the power & lighting necessary theirto. The average Sume for the program amounted per month to £ 30 wich wher payd to the Sydney firm, wich forwardet the films. An extra £ 15 per month wher charged by the Military Au
[Continued on page 85].


[Page 78]

[This report has been inserted]

Febr 9th 1916 Re Royal enquiry statement by Sands

To the course of inquiry by Jusic Pith some months ago into the administiones of the Lvpool Military Camp, several refferences wher made to the better conditions prevailing at the Germ conc Camp close by. The Comandant of the later Lieut Col R.T. Sands who was called by his Honor gawe some interesting details of his work. His duties have since gained addet importance for he has giwen charge of the whole of the Pris of War in Australia. The Comandant mentioned that the ages of the Germans in Camp ranged from 17 – 83. Their has been very little illness wich he attributed to the suitability of the site, the skill of the doctor, the devotion to duty of the A.A.MC warrant officer to the underground system of deepot drainage in operation, which was payd for out of the canteen profits. The drainage was carried away 250 yds underground to a creek, wich eptied it into the salt water of the Georges River. Their wher 20 showers & a hot water shower wich the Germans had errected themselves for the use of wich they charged one penny. Some of the Germans had to be forced to wash. I hawe had a staff sergeant major holding a certain German who was hid very high standing in Australia under the shower by the neck, while he washed the Comandant explained that there wher 45 shelters in the German camp 115 feet by 9 feet wich toke 55 Men each. They wher whole to the North east & got all the Sunshine. The shelters were his own design. Their was no drought & they wher warm in winter and Cool in summer. On Sundays all the bedding & bunks wher taken out & the whole of the shelter scrubbed down like a ship’s deck. Every shelter was thoroughly disinfected every 40 days. One was done every day. The profits of the canteen amounting to £ 2500a year or so wher applied to securing recreation & comfort for the prisoners & the health of the Camp generally. When the Germans behave themselfs they got everything possible to make them comfortable. The Comandant refering to what the profitt of the Canteen had enabled him to do, mention to say that he had bought mosquito nets for everybody in the sumer. Their was a complete electric lighting system throughout the Camp. An electric lighting plant worth £ 750 had been installed which had not cost the government a penny. He had made use of the special capacity of the Austrians who were skilled in charcoal burning. The results of this was that an expenditure of from £ 8 to £ 5 per Night on petrol had been reduced to 1sh for a bucket of charcoal. In addition to this the engine of the plant was in use during the day on a wood saw bench. The success of his administration was ascribed by the Comandant largely to the principle of decentralisation. I have made sufficient money out of the dry canteen at the G.C.C. to enable to put in 5 large stoves wich cost £.550 These will cook for 3500 men. They are in properly built kitchens & these are not waterboilers. I never saw the equal of the cooking which is done out their for food for men.


[Page 79]

They get exactly the same rations as are giwe to an Australian soldier, but they get fully 20 % more out of their rations. They use 3 times as many dishes, as the Australians. The rationes they get are those providet for by the Hague Convention. It is not true that they get more or better food than the Soldiers at Liverpool; but they certainly get more out of it.

Internment of Major Soniats Comadant during Royal enquirey regarding this Camp.


[Page 80]


Assets
Souyndry Creditores – £ 3311;
15 Liabilities – 3579.6.6 
Deffence Departement - 268.5.1
Proffits apropriated to date for purchase
Of fixred assets (as per contra – £ 2499.9
Reserve for freight – 100.0.0
Proffit & Loss apropriation excount – 1055.6.7
£ 7234.2.7

Cashe Register (at cost) – £ 83.18.1
Bread Cutters – 12.0.0.
Furniture fittings & plant at cost – £ 212.4.0
Typewriter – 15.0.0.
Pianos – £100.0.0
Buildings at cost Canteen ectra – £ 253.58
Austria Theater – £ 306.18.7
German Theater – .£ 192.16.7
Soundry improvements @ Rilrheus – £ 618.11.3
Wages buildings & Soundries – £ 621.2.6
Cinomatograph – £ 83.12..11 - £ 2499.9.9
£ 2499.9.9
£ 7234.2.7

Assets
Cashe in hand –.£ 327.8.6
Cashe at Bank - £ 2097.13.0
At Bank – £ 2425.1.6

Stock in trade at cost – £ 2119.7.3
Less reserve for Depreciation - £ 500.00
£ 1619.7.3
No 4 Compound –.£ 683.15.3
Sundry Debters - .£ 690.4.1
Totall.£ 4734.12.10


[Page 81]

Trading abstrack for month of January 1919 Pris o War Canteen, Holdsworthy
Stock at start purchased stall

Tobacco – £ 1140.15.6. £1506.19.8.£ 2647.15.2. £ 1227.8.2
Tobacco stock –£ 1227.8.2
Groceries – £ 448.5.9 £ 487.6.10. £ 935.11.10 Groceries Stock – £ 346.19.2
Appearal Boots Shoes – £ 181.1. 8. £ 181.1.8 £ 78.1.5 £ - 259.3.1. – £164,15,9
Medecines, toilet preparation – £141.10.6. - £46.28 £187.13.2
Stationary & Paper – £ 179.15.7. £ 98.15.6. £ - 278.11.1.
Miscaullaneaus - £ 71.7.3. £ 11.0.8. £ - 82.7.11;
Gross proffitt – £2237.15.5. £ 2667.15£ - 5724.7.3.

Gross proffit for month is £ 819.10.5.
Sales total – £ 605.0.0
Percentage of Gross proffitt to sales is £ 33.74

Dates February 13th 1919


[Page 82]

Proffit Statement for month of January 1919. Pris of War Canteen

To wages pay Military – £ 124.0.0.£ £ 157.11.
(Canteen) – £ 33.11.0.
Railway freight (December) – £ 3.4.7.
Cartage – £ 27.2.6.
Sundry expences – £ 38.6.1.£ 243.18.6.
Garrison Institute – £17.14.6. £
953.9.6.

Proffit & Loss Apropriation A/c

January 31 Hire for Snell – £2.10.0
January Hire Piano – £ 6.0.0.
Divident 5/Internees – £1156.0.0.
Invalids – £100.0.0.
Camp Garden ectra – £ 40.0.0.
Filmhire to Dec. 28th – £ 25.0.0.
German Theater – £ 11.16.4
Rationes – £ 156.0.0
Divident 5/Internees – £ 50.0.0.
£ 2783.0.8.

By Gross profitt as per tracking
Abstract – £ 819.10.5.
Comission – £ 85.14.6.
Discounts – 33.6.3.
Austrian Theater - £14.8.7.
Profit Decem – 953.9.6.

1918 By Balance £ 2073.9.6.
1919 January 31 Proffit & Loss – £ 709.11.2
2785.0.8.


[Page 83]

thoritys per month, nothwithstanding the fact, that the electric [indecipherable] wher bought out of the Canteen funds, & so belonged to the Internees themselves & the labor necessary thereon, wher a Internee got payd 23 per diem. The operating machine wher also wher payd for out of the Canteen fund with 85£ December 1918. On this day all consumptive Internees wich had been under Medical treatement in Waterfall Sanitorium wher returned heir, Somewher interned in the special Consumptive Camp others, on account of the want of acomodation, wher returned amongst our midst. 2/ On this day a Notice wher issued to the Internees to sellect 10 Germans & 5 Christians, to asist in the winding up of of the Prisoners Canteen & to distribute the proceeds if any. After the Camp has been in full swing & the Canteen got inaugerated, during the first week wich and same has been in the hands of the governement to since its comencement, they aske of the Internees asistance & to see that we get our just rights & a fair deal. As all the books had been attendet to by the Military & no Internee had been permitted ever to see the books, although demandet of the Camp Committee on several ocassion, however allways refused, in consequence their could be no Man to be found amongst us, willing to take on the offering, as stated previously, the Internees never had been permitted to see books, make any rules, concerning the Canteen neither in the fixcing of the prices, or the distributions of the proffits. As the Military had done with the Canteen what they had thought fitt, the Camp came to the conclussion, as the provost Marshiall Captain Bardsley had prevented the Internees from selecting a Committee, they would not vote for a Committee now, theirfore everything concerning the Canteen got left in the Militarys hands untill the time comes, to act, as our rules provide. During the week a few Internees wher released the majority wher Australian born of German parentage also, one British born in England of


[Page 84]

english parents (Scott) the rest wher Naturals and Farmers. All the Australian born Internees wher called to the Inteligence Department asked if their propertys had been confiscated, or if their Wifes or familys had continued the business. If they had a home to go to when released, also if they thought, that they would be able to procure work when released. As the hot season had sett in, allmost each & every Internee sleept in front of his barrak on the hard ground, as sleep inside the Sheds wher out of the question on account of the Vermin infested State of same Bugs & Fleece & Musquitoes, had the Sheds all Nights to themselves. On the 15/ the Soldiers held their annual Sports on the socalled Racecourse about 1000 yards from this Camp. From what the Writer could see it turned out a great suxcess. It looked similar to a general Public Picnic. Also on this day, like on the former Sports day the visitors viewed us Internees, like the animals in the Zological Gardens, becourse we also wher keept behind wires. The time will come, when some Internees, will look upon a Kangarooh in some foreign parts of this world, & think of the times, when things wher reversed. As mostly all Police wher detained in our Camp on duty & so unable to be present at the sports, they let their anger loose on Internees. They raidet all messes, wher gambling, no matter how small toke place, they confiscated the money & put the inmates of the Mess in the Lockup charged with gambling. During this time a working partie of Internees wich had refused, to finish their working period vie 14 days under the working Officer in charge, on acount of using insulting words to some Internees had their pay for 10 days confiscated by the Authoritys. Although the 40 Internees affected hawe taken all steps possible to have the S10 payd out them by the Authoritys, but without avail


[Page 85]

a Internee seems to be worse off, than a slave. A slave can complain to his Master, but an Internee can only complain to a biased hurried made Officer. Their has & still is practise common in the administration of this camp in regards of rogury, in regards of Internees food, clothing, Canteen prices & post office, besides the ready cash confixcated of Internees. The Writer could prove this acusation easily, but as the public would get only satisfaction, what has been done & become of their Money by a Royal comission, the chances are remote, as the Military will take all necessary steps, to prevent this to happen. On the 12th A Sergeant & a Private wich wher stationed in our Camp on Police duty entered a Mess in the 41 Barrak & broke the lock of a box belonging to a Internee & removed £ 5 Note out of same; This £ 5 had been send to thise Internee the day previously, through the Military Post Office. Upon the Internee making a Complaint to the Comandant Hollborrow, both the Soldiers wher put under arrest pending investigation; the Writer nor the Internee never got known results but the money never wher returned. On december 21st all work with the exception of the necessary work ceased untill January 6th. On the 6th 12 Internees Australian born got released on the 23rd 15 more. State Newspaper clipping passed resolution of the Australian Labor league, regarding Father Fergers arrest. Re the release of the whole Internees, also the answer therto of the Prime minister. Internees who visits on Sundays, by their familys, previously to entering the Visiting paddock, wher ordered into a special errected Military tent & ordered to undress while standing in a nude condition, before an officer sergeant & a private their clothing & persons got thoroughly searched, however nothing


[Page 86]

nothing deterimental to the Camp Rules wher found. This search had been ordered by Cob Hollmann, upon the order recieved from the Minister of Deffence, to instigate a search hier, wich would disover the way, in wich letter, adressed to Labor Member of the Federal & State Parliament found secretly their way to the adreses without the permission of the censer, wich would shurly not have been permitted them to pass. All Internees subdued to this search, with the exception of Father ferger, who wher ordered to return to the Camp, however two hours after, wher permitted to proceed to the visiting ground. As the Internee(Heine) whos Wife had died in Melbourne, & the Authorities only notified same 10 after the Burial, had send a letter to the Minister of Deffence Senator Pearce, through this secret channel got arrested & remained in the lockup for 12 days under the charge of Committee for trial for writing & adressing an offencive & abusive letter to the Minister of Deffence insofern the Internee had told in writing his Viewpoint about the shamefull treatement recieved since his Wifes death, that his Home house & business had been deserted, & no one left in charge, upon asked to be permitted to go under guard to Melbourne to attend to his property & put in proper care, this had been refused, wher released, although the Internee demandet to be Court marshialed, so as to enable him, to let the outside world know, how Civilisation & humanity wher dealt out to Australian internee, this request never got granted, but forced him out of the Police Station into the Main compound. This Internee complained & demandet a Court marshial of the Offi-


[Page 87]

cial visitor. The Australian press wher full allmost daily stating terrible accounts of ill treatements of Pris of War in Germany. I let the reader judge for himself at the end of this, if our treatement in general has been any better than those accounts as appeared in the press, regarding the unfortunates in Germany. 24/ This day 6 more wher released. On this day about 300lb leaf tobacco wich wher send to us Internees by the Tobacco Planters of New Guinea wher recieved, to be distributed amongst us. It amounted to about half a pound to each mess, comprising of 10 Men allthough to donation to each Internee, wher smal, same wher very much apreciated, specially the needy, as this would give them at least a smoke, as tobacco wher allmost a luxcury in this camp, on account of the prices ruling the Canteen wich wher allmost exhorbitant, vie 10sh & 6 pence per pound & no facilities giwe, or hardly any to earn any money. The Imperial Soldiers (Germans, recieved also this day an additional £ 1 each. Money wich wher send through the red cross, & subscribed in Germany. All Invalids of these Camp also those over 50 years of age recieved 10sh each as a Xmas gift of this same fund. On the 29 the Camp wher notified the following No Milk will be issued untill same arrived at the Store, signed Malloy This is another trick to rob the Internees of the little food they are permitted under the previously mentioned scale of rationes as this Camp is entitled to receive daily about 800 tins of milk. Xmas & boxcing day wher the worst every experienced in this Camp. The long internement has made the inmates feel like Lifetimers, as the saying goes. The food & the routine wher on both days the same as on any other working day. During Xmas & New year another 50


[Page 88]

Internees mostly australian born, wher released. Amongst the released wher Mr Reesh, the formerly mentioned Sydney Brewer & Mr Blau, an Austrian & Importer of Soap & Perfume into Australia. (State accounts in the daily as a Protest against the releases) 29/ The Camp hawing recieved a donation, consisting mostly of second hand wearing appearal same came for distributiones & it amounted to 10 different appearals to each Company each containing 100 persons or more. The articles wich got lots drawn for in the Writers company wher the following 3 Vests 3 trousers 3 Shirts & 1 Overcoat. Though this Gifts consisted as stated previously of second hand, the appearal wher indeet mush required by the lucky need, Internees, as mostly especialy those interned in Australia run allmost naked about, becourse the clothing issue of the Governement being insufficient, as they had been arrested in most instances at a moments notice, & no time granted by the Arresting Authoritys in getting their belongings, previously to their departure for the Internement Camp. In a good few instances these Internees hawe written & applied to hawe the Clothing forwardet unto them. However in most cases, the letters wher ignored. However if the Clothing wher forwardet, to some of them, allmost in every instance only part of the contents arived, the parcel hawing being rifled during transit to this Camp. New rules wher also issued to this Camp by the Military post office advising the married Internees that in futher 1 pence halfpenny would be charged on letters in private enveloped, adressed to their wifes, residing in Australia. 30. This is the last day of the old year & every [indecipherable] its usual routine course


[Page 89]

During the evening the Restaurants wher well patronised by the more wealthy Internees at 11.30pm the Camp Band gave selectiones untill 12.30pm, as the authoritys had granted the Camp permission to be able to keep the Stable lanterns in each Mess burning untill 1pm January 1 This is the 5 New year for some Internees to find themselves behind Wires with their liberty robbed becourse of "Birthright only, a place wich is worse, than the worst Criminal Institution in any part of Australia. Becourse the Internees are quaterly fed & quarterly clothed, while the criminal has its his change of clothing at least ones per week. In this condition the Internees wher compelled to work on account the Hunger, wich ruled this Camp, work wich got only payd at ¼ of the standard wages, ruling in Australia. Is it a wonder that youths & several under 30 years of age hawe turned grey haired. During the afternoon each needy Internnee recieved 10sh of the money send to this Camp by some wealthy German, residing in Germany but wich had Capital invested in several mines of Australia. The rest consisted of money out of the Camp Canteen funds. This day wher a great day in Camp, the Butchers & Bakers within our Camp made a roaring trade, becourse now they had a chance to any foodstuffs, with the presented money. At least, if nothing else every Internee had a full stomach on the second day of January. As several letters had been forwardet to the Minister of Deffence aplying for release, the Intelegence officer notified the Camp, that no letters applying for release would be forwardet in futher 2/ 4 Internees wher transferred to darlinghurst Jail, for trying to steal in the German Theater. State accounts of the escapes while


[Page 90]

also letter of protest of Womens. Rivers recapture also Soldiers resolution. In the 4th Seaman & Carre wher rearested (state account of the 5). On the morning of the 5th A Sergeant know to us under the name of Ginger Cat the Internee wait on the Paradeground out of motives of his own though all Internees wher awaiting for his service to count us, previously to being permitted to recive the breakfast. We in consequences of this action in conjunction of the cooks had to wait to please this Sergeant. When upon several request to count the sergeant refused, all Internees broke loose & proceedet to recieve our Coffee. A Internee who had put before the Lieutenant his complaint regarding this action of the Sergeant to wher arrested & placed in the lockup. As about 1000 Internees gathered around this Officer & protested against this wrongfull arrest, all the Military turned out in force, arived with loadet battons & revolvers amongst the Internees & dispersed same with treats of all sorts. The Internees retreated to their barracks, & dit not giwe the Police the least pertext, to make use of any wappon, becourse if 1 Internee had been hit by one of the Police, the writer is positive, that their would hawe been a general riot in the Camp, & no doubt also bloodshed, all on account of the unjust action of a Internee Sergeant, who had allways acted spitefull, & has looked for to incite trouble amongst the Internees whenever on duty. During the forenoon another Internees got arrested for breaking away from the parade ground & also placed in the Lockup. The Comandant held a formaly enquiry. No Internee wher granted a hearing allthough all the Military wher called before him & heard. At the end of about 2 hours the Internees present to giwe evidence, wher ordered back to the Compound while the arestants wher taken back to the Lockup, under the order, Court is adjourned untill tomorrow. On the morning of the 6th the wittness of the prosecution wher again heard by the Comandant, but none for the deffence, allthough 7 Wittnesses wher waiting. The Comandant ordered


[Page 91]

one of the acused got sentenced to be remowed to the Singh Singh Compound, while the other recieved sentence of 7 days in the Lockup. Allthough the writer heard personaly the Comandant say to one of the acused. I giwe you the benefitt of the doubt, but you will hawe to goe into the Sing 
Singh Compound. When the arrestants wher remowed to the lockup, the Comandant called the Sergeant into the Court & explained to him about the condradictory evidence giwen by the Police if the several points the Internee had had him on. This is another clear, prove that the Internees never or seldom recieved a fair deal at the hands of the comandant. Though one Internee could not be found guilty of the charge layd against him by the Police, but the Comandant instead of aquitting him sentenced him into Sing Singh. On the 4th £ 14 wher collected in this Camp, to aid the internees in Singh singh to enable them to procure additional nourishement, also to help, to make their lonely time in their, a bit lighter as their place wher indeet a [indecipherable] yard & their Cot-a-bad lot. The Writer never wher able to proccure a specise list of stores, wich wher failed to issue to us Internees however during December this Camp, got issued 5000 ordinary tins condensed Milk tins short. The food for breakfast usually consist of the following: Breakfast Black weak tea & dry bread. Dinner: A smal pice of meat, peans or peas up for about 500 men, the other 900 in each Kitchen had to await their turn. Every 2-3 day a few potatoes wher addet . Tea. ¼ pint of tea & bread. Every 3rd week each Internees recived a jam tin full of fatt from our Kitchen, wich wher saved from our meat. All our Cooks complained about the shortage of food stuff & ingredients, as their whas none to begot from the store, we Internees had to goe without. The Pots & cooking utensils wher in adequate. In the Cooking Pots the Cooks had to fry the fatt during the Night. Boil Coffee in the mornings


[Page 92]

meat extra for dinner & tea in the afternoon. All this food got cooked in the same pott. Same hardly wher washed out & cleaned, when the Cooks required them again for the next meal. The writers wiches heir, to inform the reader, that any provissiones either quantittes or qualities due to us, through the neglect of the Authorities, wherever made up so is it a wonder, that hunger is at, "home in this Camp. 14/ The Tombstone Committee notified the Camp this day that the application, to be permitted to errect tombstones on the graves of deceased Internees had been refused by Deffence Department. So the graves of the unfortunate deceased Internees at Liverpool & Rookwood had to remain bare. So the Committee & wher compelled to hand over the Money collected in different sources of the Camp over tho the Swiss Council to hawe the Stones errected on the Internees behalf when the restrictions are removed. Up till the time of writing only the graves of 3 deceased Internees are decorated with tombstones, prented by the Camp. Another Internee (Siegfried) made a bolt bid for liberty (state account of Newspaper). That my complaints, re the administration of our Camp by the Authorities are justified, has been proven by the Royal Commission inaugurated by the Public. How could the Commonwealth of Australia, expect, to hawe proper administration in their Deffence Departement, when the Head official in this Department an excarpenter (State account of Daily). On the 14th All austrians wher called into the enquirey office, before a Military Tribunal & asked if they intendet to remain in Australia, or demandet repatriation. About 20&percnt expressed their desire to remain. In a good few instances those who wiched to remain, only are compelled by circumstances, as


[Page 93]

they hawe either property wich they wiche to dispose of previously to their departure or else their Wifes & family & the duties attached their to compelled them to remain. On the 17th the turn of the Internees of Queensland, wher asked de same questiones. I am positive about 75&percnt will leave Australia of the total Internees at the end of hostilities. On this day after 4 ½ years of the Camp existence, electric light wher installed into the Music Pavillion. Up till now the evening concert, to asist the Internees to help them to forget their hard life had been giwen with the asistance of stable lanterns & a few carbide lamps, manufactored in the Camp, by the Internees themselves (State Sydney labor Council entered a protest to the Federal Governement, re us Internees & the illigal detainement of the Civilians of Australia behind Barbwire, as Armistic has been signed months ago by all the beligerents. On this day a young russian, wich had been taken of a Steamer of wich he wher passenger in China, bound for the Philipines Island to releave the Russian Consul their, hawing being send their by the Bolshevick Governement of that Plation. This Gentleman, who wher 27 years of age, Engeneur by trade & a linguist of 7 languages, wher transferred hier from the Monogle Camp. The writer has it personally from this Sayd Gentleman, that the Australian Military Authorities, had wher still demanding of same, to sign a Austrian Name. As he had refused they had sentenced same to 7 day Lockup. He admitted to be a Bolshevick. All his luggage wher still labelled with Russian Railway labels. This unfortunate Gentle


[Page 94]

had been Keept by the Military, pending deportation in a jail in China, thance the Jail in Thursday Island thance Darlinghurst Jail, Monoglo Camp, Darlinghurst Jail, back to Monoglo camp & thance to this Compound. The life in this Camp he started with previously stated 7 days lockup, wherupon he wher putt into the trial bay Compound or Camp, No 4 & this Gentleman suffered all this becourse he belonged to a Socity wich fought the case of the working class suxcessfully in his Native land. Although the Rules & regulationes as issued to this Camp, never mentioned anything regarding loadet Battons or a sandbag being permitted to be used still the Writer has seen on this day 12 buttones & a sandbag about 2lb in weight, hanging on the board wher all the wappons used by the Police. So the opinion & experience of the writer of this Camp & its treatement in general, has come to the conclussion that this Sandbag gets used in the isolation Cells on the Internees, if they resist any order, as a batton leaves in most instances a telltale mark, while a sandbag acts noiseless. To prove to the reader ill treatement is rife, I wiche to state a Internees experience while detained in the lockup. (Giwe Krugers experience) state Newspaper clipping re meeting in Sydney town Hall. Women proved alderman a liar) Why this respexctable Gentleman had to grasp to this measure to raise hate in the breasts of the Australian attendants is unknown to the Writer, but shurly this Gentleman must be of a low Character not fitt for his position, to stoop so "low as


[Page 95

Women against Release – Meeting of protest [newspaper cutting – not transcribed]


[Page 96]

use untruths to affect his purposse. On the 21st the following notice wher issued to this Camp. Alien enemys who ar released from the Concentration Camps must understand, that the fact of release is no guarantee, that they will not afterwards be deported or repatriated. A decission to the compulsory repatriation of alien enemys may not be reached untill the terms of the Peace Conference are Known. Signed G.A.H. Hollborrow Major Comandant G.C.C.

27/ This the day of the Birthday of the German Emperor. To honor the day. The band blew Reveile at six a.m. also giwing selectiones in the Camp. At 10 o’clock wher Church with patriotic sermon at 2p.m. Happy gathering of the German Reservists & Recruits in the Germ Gymnastic hall, a double spacious building build by the Germ. Turnverein Members. The String band gawe selectiones, while the Internees listened to patriotic speaches & drinking coffee & eating cakes to their hearts content. This all wher free as a collection wich had been made in the Camp wher sufficient to cover everything, also the Cigarettes. At 7p.m. Vaudeville with patriotic Speeches wher held in the Austrian Hall, admittance by free tickets, also a good programs wher shown in the German Theater. On the 28th each Internee recieved 5sh out of the Canteen fund. On the 30 wher a "General Call of all internees. While on this parade every Internee wher told by the Official in charge. Those who wiche to remain in Australia to giwe their Names in to the Non comissioned Officer on the Right, those who wiche to be repatriated to the left. Of this noncomissioned officer we wher asked, wher we intendet to be send to, the Wife’s adresse. Her christian Name also family name. How many children


[Page 97]

the distination of repatriation wher the following Countrys. Germany, Bulgaria, Austria, Ungary & Turkey. About 30% put in their Names to remain in Australia. Also in this instance, like in the Austrians their wher several who remain in Australia for the same purposse, includet in this percentage are the born Australians also interned amongst us.

Feb 1 – Each Company Comander had a list issued by the Military Authorities to aske the N.S.W. Internees & put down in writing on same answer the on the following questiones. Wher are you intendet to be send to? Are you married or single? Nationality of Wife? Children (how many). The Adress of the Wife? On Febr the 4th on account of the Newspaper scare of the epedemic called Influenca or flu) the N.S.W. Governement toke drastic action & put the State into quarantine. In consequence thereof, this Camp wher quarantined also & shutt of from the outside world alltogether. The Butcher who generally delivered the Meat for the Camp outside out Kitchens, had to remain at the speciyfied distance. To a soldier drove same into the Camp. When empty, he returned to the place wher the original driver wher waiting. This same rule adhered to all other business vehicles. On this day, the Internees of the Sing Singh compound, becourse the Military Police suspekted the inmates thereof to being in the posession of an illicit still wher ordered to come outside the compound & to remain between the barbwire fence & the high fence covered with bushe, so that the inmates of same wher prevented from viewing the general compound. A heavy guard wher stationed at both sides while about 40 Police & Soldiers entered Singh Singh


[Page 98]

to effect or search. While those wher searching a Inmate of Singh singh sett a light to the dry bushe fence wich wher about 8 feet away from the Barbwire fence & in an instant the fence caught alight. The Soldiers inside the Compund rushed out, to subdue the flames. The inmates wher returned into the Compound & secretly looked in. While the soldiers wher fighting the flames the Internees inside the Compound shouted for yoy, as now they would be able to look a bit further than 8 yards behind the wire fence. The Soldier on guard on one of the towers, as one tower with a running Bridge wher especialy build, one on each corner, to enable the authority to keep a close vigilance on the inmates of the Sing Singh compound, told the Prisoner to decist in shouting a change of a few words to Replace between both parties, with the result tat bad expressiones got used on both sides, with the result that the Guard fired between the Internees. One Internee (Schwartz) who wher interned into Singh Singh becourse he wher a member of the Industrial Workers of the world Socity about 2 years ago, got shot through the right leg, the bullet going right through the bone. The woundet Men got attendet by the Internees & half hour after taken to the hospital to receive medical attention wher he remained. In consequence of this unjustified shooting the inmates got angry, as the fault had layd on both sides as it wher the soldiers duty if insulted by an Internee to report to his superior officer & hawe same punished. So when the fire wher extinguished the Prisoners wher ordered to come outside of their compound again, so that the Soldiers could


[Page 99]

finishe their search, with the result, that another altercation toke place with the result, that two more shots got fired by the guards, but lucky, both missed their mark. Theirupon the Internees came out & the soldiers finished their fruitless search. Thereupon the Internees wher ordered into their Campaign & locked in. To show to the reader, how the authorities misslead the public to the true facts of the ocurence & the treatement recieved state accounts of Sydney Daily. To make the Story of the Military look through true, the Military Police arrested inside the Camp one Internee & charged him with, trying to escape. This arrestant wher an Austrian & hardly able to converse in english. He wher tried by Officials of this camp & sentenced to 14 days solid confinement on bread & water, on a trumped up charge.

6/ On this day each Internee recieved a smal towel, about 24 by 12 inches. On this day the woundet internee of Singh Singh compound wher putt under Chloroform for the period of 2 hours, as the bullet had enter the Butthook & splintered the bone, previous to its excite. The medical doctor wired the bone together & the operation proved generaly suxcessfull (State report of the Deffence departement regarding the Camp in the Daily). This is a very missleading report & contradictory to true facts. On the day in question the Consuls was reported to visit the Camp & as per rule any Internee wishing to see same must put request in duplicate writing. This Consul remained to listen to complaints for half an hour, when he seen that to listen to all Internees, wiching to see him would take him allmost the best part of the day.


[Page 100]

[newspaper cutting]

Contrast in Treatment- 
10.11.19

Melbourne, Sunday – The Commonwealth Defence authorities are now giving publicity to the statements of individual repatriated Australian prisoners of war concerning their treatment in Germany.

The stories told by the soldiers of their sufferings, and the brutal methods adopted towards them by their captors, constitute in the main a most damning indictment of German inhumanity.

In striding contrast to the statements of Australian prisoners, concerning their treatment in German internment camps, is a report by the Acting-Consul for Switzerland in Australia of the conditions prevailing at the German Concentration Camp at Holsworthy, New South Wales. The Swiss Consul, after visiting the camp on behalf of the German Government on September 26, 1918, reported in the highest terms on the treatment extended to the internees and the general camp arrangements. His report to the German Government on the result of his visit to the camp has been incorporated by the Defence Department in the booklet exposing the manner in which the Germans treated Australian prisoners of war.


[Page 101]

[newspaper cutting]

Shot in the Back
Internees Missed from Camp

Liverpool, Wednesday
Two internees of the Sing Sing compound at Holdsworthy attempted to escape on Tuesday night. One of them Schwartz, was shot in the back, and is now in the hospital. The other man was recaptured.


[Page 102]

Singh Singh Feb 4th I regret to say I cannot keep my promise, to send you an elaborate report today as my thoughts are influenced by the events wich hawe taken place, during the last few hours. However I shall giwe you an idea of what has ocured today for their will be all kinds of rumors bussing about in your compound. This afternoon at about 2 o’clock. Singh had just enjoyed its afternoon sleep. Their arived the Provost Marshall Sergent Major Chesser 25 Policemen & a great number if Soldiers well equipped with rifle catridges & bayonets, we recieved orders to leave Singh Singh, as a search in the compound was to take place, wich ocured ones before. We had nearly all left the compound peacefully & settled down comfortably by the Waterproof fence outside the compound when suddenly the fence wich separated us from the big compound began to burn. It is sayd to have started outside the fence. Simulstaneously with the outbreak of the fire a little trouble ocured between one of our fellow Internees. Soldiers one of whom [indecipherable] the bayonet into the buttock of one of our mates. The fence burnt more strongly now We recieved orders to return to the Compound wich we dit. As one Man was stabbed with the bayonet, the officer [indecipherable] his tools wher asked wether it wher includet in the conditiones of the armistice to use the bayonet on civil persons. As all means were at the disposal of the God chosen authority without resort to bayonetting & rifle bullets, we can tell tale of that.

Now the 3 Soldiers, who had distinguished themselves with the bayonets recieved the order from the Provost Marshall Drumond to return to the gate, wich they carried out with bayonet ready for that charging. Thereupon the shooting area between the sentries & us became free while before we wher covered by the Officer & the 3 soldiers as the area was now free and not fired from the rifle of the guard. No 1 after ¼ minute aint a strikingly long time. We calculated 2-3 seconds later our fellow pris B Schwartz an Austrian fell back towards the ground, he was hit. Another Victory for the Union Jack. When the shot was fired about 10 men including Schwartz were standing in a circle of about 8 yards in diameter, the bullet had entered Schwartz right butthook at the hight of the pelvise bone.

When sometime afterwards the doctor arived, I myself under rendered asistance. The trousers wher burnet open & after the thick blood had been removed, we could see the hole made by the bullet, wich was the size of a big pea everything was covered with blood the Doctor could not (or wished not) to find the spot wher the bullet had left the butthook. The Gentleman was also in a state of great excitement, laughingly he remarked, that the bullet must be still in the body. The doctor wound a temporary round the wound & Schwartz was wheeled to the hospital. Schwarz keept up an astonishing good humor, untill the doktor arived in spite of his injury, but when we turned him around, pains sett in & Schwarz complained, that he feelt as if the pelvis bone had been shattered, as he was unable to mowe his right leg in spite of every effort. More details we do not Know ourselfs as yet. Judging by the direction in wich the shot was fired, since it was discharged from the height of the bridge, I presume, that the bullet after entering


[Page 103]

the butthook must hawe passed out again yet I could not notic anything as the botthook was covered with blood. The Doctor also dit not wishe that we should know to he emidiately wrapped some bandages around it & sayd bullet is inside But now it happens that several of us had seen how the shot after it fullfilled its purpose must hawe struck the earth a pace to half from Gustave Schroder Aug Hutt to myself pain the same moment the sand flew up at the spot five paces from Schwartz, it then struck the earth, made a smal, long hole & must hawe flewn still further again. This is the second time, that a bullet has made its way in my close vicinity. Now we shall wait for the 3rd time, perhaps the Authoritys, still hawe another bullet in store & that is what one calls "Fate at any rate after 4 ½ years imprisonement under the loyal english flag, it is certainly not pleasant.

After Schwartz had been taken to the hospital we wher again hunted out of the Compound, during wich operation, the well trained soldiers in their excitement fired 2 more shots without causing any more damage. Now our Wigwams were examined & after 15 minutes the Australian Armie & the police force withdrew, with a captured still, propably the purpose of the whole affair. I say however, propably The whole affair, the shooting includet made a somewhat suspicious impression upon us, perticular, because the shot was fired imidiately the coast was clear; the fire wich was meanwhile had been extinguished, had remowed a third of the fence. Unfortunately we wher unable to take part in the extinquishing it. Tomorrow morning first thing will begin the usual nonsense with inquiries ectra. In regard to our departure tomorrow, it seems nothing will eventuate, perhaps instead of going to Germany, we shall go to Darlinghurst, but a [indecipherable] trip anyhow. Frank Krist & I looked somewhat closer to the Herd (a real Larriking about 20 & particular his face. The little monkey threatens us mowe or I’ll kill another one of you Bastards. Many greetings (Name)

Eywitness statement regarding Schwarz shooting Singh Singh


[Page 104]

this sayd Gentleman got excited & taking his hat he left the Camp. Some Internees who had waited a considerable time outside the office, sayd Come back our Governement pays you to listen to our complaint. With the words of "I never toke a Penny of a German get, he left, to come back again only a month later. As the Gentleman is in Busness & not a Diplomat it stands to reason, that for buisness reason & his porket he mast side with the majority of the australian population, wich had been teached through the medium of the Press to hate anything wich is German or had German a conection. To the Writer it is amusing to read of the account in the Press re the issue of this booklet by the Deffence Departement of treatement the Prisoner recieved in Australian Internement Camps left so much to be desired. As stated on several occasion, the writer has not excagerated anything wich has happened in this Camp, but writes only facts, to wich he can swear to & to wich he can procure evidence, if needs be to prove the facts. On the 11th A Internee (Kruger recieved corespondence of a doktor also of Private people residing in Brisbane that his fiancee lay dying & Recption calling for him, was the Queensland Military Authorities wich had been aproached by those people to grant the Internee permission to visit had been refused, they advised him to apply hier. This Internee aplied of Captain Bardsly permission to proceed to Brisbane under guard, untertaking to cover all necessary expences. This however got blankly refused. Upon several request however they granted him permission to forward two telegrams, one to the doctor, one to the Deffence Departement asking for permission to proceed to Brisbane to enable him to see his fiancee, previously to the worst happening During the


[Page 107]

afternoon the Reply of the Doctor arrived, reading. Case critically advise to come. Doctor Roe during the Evening the reply of the Deffence Departement arived, reading. Request cannot be granted . Grumble Secretary. Though, this Internee offered to pay all necessary expences for himself to guard the Departement refused to see each other, previous to death intervening 13/ 5 Internees being release 4 brothers born in Australia of Germ decent, who had been interned as the writer has it personally of the sayd Brothers, out of spite becourse they had refused to enlist allthough hawing being requested to do so by the Deffence departement (Derhert). The other (Kleine) wher of Germ birth, nationaliced in Australia for 1/4 century. During the outbreak of War, this Internee, wher in Germany on a visit. When the Germ. Governement started to intern Civilians, wich wher in 1915, they interned this sayd Gentleman becourse he wher a Australian Nationalised subject & repatriated to Australia in 1916. But upon his arival hier he wher detained by the Authoritys & interned in the Germ Conc. Camp hier. Through the information recieved by the Committee of his experience regarding the Internement Camp Ruhleben Germany wher all Civilians wher detained, the Camp Committee forwardet the Request stated formerly, to hawe the Standard of this Camp equall to that prevailing in Ruhleben. Under oath this Gentleman proved to the Camp Committee the difference excisting between both Camps both in food quality & treatement On this day the inmates of the Singh Singh Compound wher escorted under the guard of 22 soldiers & Captain Bardly mounted for a walking exercise outside of their Compound. The amount of Internees numbering 29 this wher the first exercise granted to those Internees by the authorities outside of their compound since errection in 1916. This granting of the exercise had


[Page 106]

his reason. Owing as formerly the bush fence hawing burnt down, & Internees from the Main compound ([indecipherable]) has refused to errest same, the Authorities had ordered Australian soldiers off, to do this work. So as the soldiers would not be molested by the Inmates, while doing the work they wher taken out. So when the Inmates returned, the fence wher errested & their view of the general sarounding barred. As stated, this wher the first exercise granted outside, the Inmates on several occasion, to break the monotony & to get a view outside the bush fence, with wher 8 yards off the barbwire fence they tresspassed the Rules & Regulation governing the discipline of the Camp, wich in most instances wher, Insulting a Officer As a punishement they wither recieved Lookup but in most instances they wher sentenced to a term in Darlinghurst Jail. In allmost every instance the Internee sentenced, dit it with the full knowledge of being sentenced, as they put it themselves "To get a change & to break the monotony. 18/’ One amongst our midst wher taken by the ambulance to hospital & case diagnosed as thy Typhus. Upon this Case the Sanatary Gang employed within the Camp wher ordered to pour fenol into the Gutter & waterways, wich in consequence wher more liberal issued. As sayd previously, that this Camp is a disgrace & Civilisation & humanity was the epedimic called Spanish Influenza had entered the State of N.S.W. The Governement of N.S.W. issued a proclamation, called this State an infected State & guaranteed itself of from the other states. The outside public wher ordered to buy mask & carry same, as a preventive meassure. Still, 19 Miles from Sydney 4 Miles from Liverpool lays the Germ. Conc. Camps the Black Hole of Australia, wher close on 8000 Persons are compelled to lie & sleep in an arrea not exceeding 200 acres. God help this Camp, if the desease breaks the barrier of our gates & breaks out amongst the Internees


[Page 107]

[newspaper cutting 20/2/19]

GERMAN INTERNEES – QUESTION OF RELEASE
COMMITTEE TO DEAL WITH APPLICATIONS

Melbourne, Tuesday – There will be no further release of internees until the Commonwealth Government is assured of the wisdom of such action.

The Cabinet to-day approved of the appointment of a committee, which will probably consist of a representative of the Defence Department, a business man, and a judicial or legal representative, which will deal with all applications for release from internment. Hitherto this matter has been dealt with by the Government on the recommendation of the Defence and other departmental authorities.

"We are going to make sure in future," said Mr. Watt to-night, "that a very careful examination of all such applications is made before recommendations are dealt with."


[Page 108]

inside the Compound it will be God help you, for the Military Authorities of Australia cannot, as the facilities to deal with the sick, is in adequate in ordinary times at this Camp. But let us hope for the best. As a precaution, the Authorities had issued orders, to cease all leave to the Guards be giwen. From the date February the 8th untill the 15, the guard toke things as they came, those who returned from leave, giwen previously to the order, wher put in 4 days quarantine (tents put up at the Road Guard), entering the Camp. However on the 15th the solders comenced troubling the Officers, regarding leave, & in some instances demandet, as the accomodation, wich wher similar to our (Internees) wher very trying & allmost unbearable. Seeing the trouble brewing, & knowing the Guards would take matters in hand themselves, the Comandant granted the Soldiers demands (State Paper acount As a preventive meassure, to keep our Camp healthy (if possible) every Internee asisted the cleanliness of the Camp in general, as well as bodily.

Allmost each & everyone sleep outside of the barraks, so as to hawe as much fresh air as possible, & to keep away from the numerous Vermins, housing inside the sheds, as fleece, bugs & mosquitos wher uncountable their, & impossible for us Internees to extinguish. Hunderts of this Vermin each Internee kills allmost daily wich are found inside of the socalled Bunks, but nightime the articles are as full as previously, as the wooden sheds & close vicinity of each other acts as a happy breeding & hunting ground, for the formerly mentioned Vermin. 8/ This day the Soldiers Guards wich had been on guard furlough returned & put into the socalled isolation camp at the formerly explained Road Guard House, their wher about 30 tents for sleeping purposes & 1 Marque for Meals. On account of the heavy rain was the Soldiers had to sleep on a Rubber sheet on the Ground inside of leaking tents, they in a body protested to remain, as some of the Quarantined Soldiers proceedet to their Platoon sheds (Barraks) while others returned to Liverpool seeking proper acomodation.


[Page 109]

[2 small newspaper cuttings – not transcribed]


[Page 110]

The discipline ruling amongst the Guards seems to be fosial, as the Officers in charge of the Guard s are mostly Made Officers, and know about Rules & Regulationes indeet less than Soldiers themself. State account of daily. As the comment upon what I wishe to inform the Public on facts of humanity, wich hawe been practised for years inside this Camp, not one Internee had foreseen, to wich depths this Officials in charge of this Camp would stoop, to cause of "wholesale murder" amongst the undefendet, much hated German Internees. Allmost 75% of the Internees inside this Camp, wher & had been respectable Citizens of Australia for years, in several instances married to Australians & rearing Australian Children. They lived joyfully when since 1914 a Officer & Police arrested same & without cause, without trial, toke them to the side of a hill, surrounded by Barbwire & guardet by Soldiers with bayonets fixced so cut off from the outside World & civilication, under-nourished ill housed & unsufficiently clothed, the Internees had to remain, in some instances for the period of 5 years.

It is a wonder that the death rate amongst the Internees & the mentally aflicted has not been larger than it has been. But this is not an act of the Government, but the Internees toke all precaution themselves by the Camp administration inside of our Camp, wich had nothing to do with the Military looked after our wellfare & wellbeing, in errecting Institutiones inside of our Camp, also diverse places of Recreation out of Money & labor gathered by the Internees themselves wholy. This keep our body & mind healthy. This mode of life had gone on, in several instances for the period of 7 years, when the wellcome news wher recieved, that armistice had been signed. This gawe rise to a general hope that our liberation out of this Dante Inferno wher close at hand & everyone lived cheerfull & in hopes to hawe


[Page 111]

Christmass 1918 outside amongst humanity & Civilications & away from the much hated Barbwire. [indecipherable] as it had proven, it only had been a hope & in vain. Wher it a wonder, that the Camp Inmates passed the Holidays, as formerly stated, so quitly & immaterial of this being the holiday, they had enjoyed most, since Childhood, knowing their hopes hawing being shattered, & the wellknown Christmass choral Peace be with you & Goodwill amongst Men is only in Print. Every Internee still lived continuously in hopes that every day might bring their liberty. January & even February passed without bringing us nearer to our liberty. To the Internees dismay addet the report in the Sydney Newspaper of the arrival of Civilianes Internees Pris of War, wich had been interned in Germany & Turkey respektively, while we being still detained hier & in several Cases our familys residing in some part of Australia, wher compelled in consequence of this had still to continue to undergo untold hardships & missery. When during the Night of 19-20 of February 3 shots wher fired, one bullet whistling through the Camp. Why wher the shots fired? 2 Internees seeking to regain their liberty, of wich, of they had been robbed, through no fault of their own for 3 years. Knowing that they be fired upon, they preffered death, if need must be, to the live in this Camp. The Life in Jail indeet is prefferable, to all of us. This Internees however wher captured & brought to the lockup wher they wher sentanced on the following day to seven & 14 days respectively, for trying to escape & keept in the Lockup on bread & water. In consequence of this attempted escape the whole Camp recieved an aditional punishement, as per Notice issued to us wich read the following, Liverpool 20th 1919. In acordance


[Page 112]

[newspaper cutting not transcribed]


[Page 113]

with the clause of the Rules for the custody of & maintaining discipline among Pris of War, the vegetable gardens & Recreatiion ground & connected with the main compound will be closed from Friday February 21st instant for (7) days on account of an atempted escape about Midnight on the 19-20 Febr 1919 Signed Hollman Lieut. Col. Comandant. In a body the Internees protested against this injust sentence, as it wher deuterimental to the Rules & Regulation governing the good discipline of the Camp & without formerly made arangements without guide Leadership or advise they protested, insofern that they refused to fall in on the Parade as usual. As the only Recreation ground in wich Internees could pass the day to keep physically & mentally fitt wher closed the Internees sulkingly, marshed inside the Barbwire of the overfilled Compound like Liones in the Cages of the Zoo. On this day the following notice wher issued to the Camp. The employment of Permanent Camp cleaners hawing ceased Company Comanders must arrange to hawe a Man at the Main gate every morning at 9 a.m. to fill the Camps with oil, as from tomorrow. Signed L Molloy, Major AsTs QmGC Camps. As no Internee had layd down their work voluntaryly but the Comandant try to dispell of 2 Internees labor wich had been employed to fill all the lamps with Oil since Camp comencement & hand this aditional work upon the allready overfilled work of the Company Comanders, as they xcertainly would hawe meet with trouble in finding Men daily to fill the Lamps without pay, the Company Comanders put their request, to continue the employment of the two Internees as Lamp fillers. However as the Comandant refused their Request, they in a body resigned, the Comandant accepted the resignation instantly. As every Internee had now, to look for himself, as no Company Comanders wher their, & as formerly mentioned, as a protest in receiving our injust punishment at the Hands of the Comandant, they


[Page 114]

refused to fall in on parade to be counted as previously 2 times per diem but to get their ¼ pint of tea without being counted. But as a suprise Partie 1 Captain with several Military Police entered Camp & wendet their way to the Kitchens. Upon seeing the large Pots wich contained the so called tea, standing outside ready to be issued. The Lieutenant ordered the Cooks, to pour all the tea on the round, wich request they in a body however refused. Theirupon this Officer issued orders to the Military Police to pour the tea on the ground, wich order of course wher instantly obyed. In consequence, the tea run all over the ground in all directions. I do not say, that they wher not justified in doing so, however I think it most unjust & detrimental to our health, as the tea leafs will remain laying all over the overfilled Camp untill the mercifull wind blows it away, as their action will never asist of the wellbeing of the Camp & the desired harmony between the Internees & Officials & the socalled Flu all over Australia 22pts not to hawe another occurence as the previous nights the Internees wendet their way to the Kitchen previously the Bugle call & recieved their Coffee.

During the Working Parade the Officials & guards turned up, however no Internees as being civilian Internees & could not be compelled to work for underpayd wages had decidet to remain in Camp, as a protest of the unjustified punishment, as the Camp had been punishet without the sanction of the visitor as per Rules & regulationes. So the Camp authorities called the Camp on Strike "Sanitary Gang however wher willing to continues in the interesse of the Camp however refused to attend to the arrangements excisting previously to the Soldiers Camp, also all the Kitchen Members remained. During the whole day no issue of any food stuff entered our Camp with the exception of Meat & bread. On Sunday the


[Page 115]

23/ during the forenoon the Boss of the whole Sanitary of the Camp, who had been in quarantine wher recalled by the Officials for interview. Thereupon Sergeant Grivel still wearing the compulsory mask in company of Sergeant judge entered camp & proceedet their way to the structure errected in the middle of the Camp wher all Sanitary tools & infectants other Keept, locked same & toke the keys with them also wieving the offal barrels & Closets inside our Camp. As the sanitary gang attending the W.C. had their passes necessary to do this work taken from them by the authorities & upon a special request the night previously by 2 Internees Steinbonther Louders to hawe same returned had been refused, but the Authorities demandet the Internees to bring the Pans to the Maingate & put same inside the Sanitary wagons in some instances close on 1300 yards, this hawing being refused by the Inernees the closets not hawing being cleaned looked in a filthy sate, as the W.C. arangements in our Camp wher in ordinary times inadequate as same had to be cleaned 3 times per day to make same sufficient. During this day only part of our bread rations got issued also the meat, but no other provissiones. In regards of the Bread ration issuer the officials insisted that the Internees had to carry the Bread wich in some instances amounted to be ¼ of a mille, becourse they withdraw the waggon with usualy had carried all the Bread into the Camp from the Military Bakery. As the majority of the internees requested to hawe at least the Bread ration carted to the maingate to be taken possession of their they refused to go outside the Camp to the Bakery in consequence had to go without bread. 29/ On account of the Officials hawing taken the keys away the Sanitary conditions of this Camp leaves much to be desired. The gutters the space between the barraks & the


[Page 116]

W.C. in a very unhealthy state. As shovels brooms wheelbarrow & disinfectants are locked away & the Keys in posession of the Authorities. Are the officials bend on breeding germs amongst our midst, to wipe out all Internee from the face of the Earth, or try to compell the Internees to Mutiny, to enable them to committ & wholesale slaughter with deadly bullets. The Pans amounting to about 120 wich had been in constant use by about 5000 Internees for close on 8 days wher in consequence over-filled & request wher made to the Comandant to grant us the Night-soil wagon to be permitted to enter the Camp, as the Internees voluntary would clean all the closets & bring the waggon to the gate hawing being refused, the Officials persisting in the Internees carrying the open Pans to the gate the Reader can gues the state of affairs this Camp has been in. Outside the Camp, the Law reignis among Civilians to asist the Authorities in stamping out the flu, while the Officials under this same Governements Rule breed deadly desease germs in a compound only 4 Miles from the main Railway line & Civilication. On this day the Authorities closed the Pris of War Canteen all money send in to the Compound & all registered mails. To enforce hunger all the orders issued by the Shops inside the Camp for transmission to sydney wher withheld, also all ariving parcels & boxes containing foodstuff, with the exception of perishable goods, like fruit ectra. The Camp Authorities try to force, to the Writers opinion, in with hunger to mutiny, as to enable them to carry out their dastardly act. On this day as no firewood has been issued this Camp for 3 days & as several barraks vacated by the transmission of the Austrians to the new barraks, & wich since had been Keept empty although the Barraks wher over filled wher demo-


[Page 117]

bolished by Soldiers with the assistance of acces & Crowbars & the material carted out of camp, as a preventive from us Internees getting firewood. During this afternoon all Inmates of the Camp Hospital wher ordered into the Compound with the exception of 6 cases wich wher critical visous Typhus case & 7 suffering with lung desease the doctor giwing as an excuse as the Internees hawing ceased all work & no cooks & attendants wher procurable from our midst his staff wher unsufficient to carry on the dutys nescessary to all. Among these returnes wher several unable to walk & several on reaching the Main gate had to be asisted to enable them to reach their Shelfs inside of their Barraks. Also amongst those wher an Austrian with a broken leg who had to remain in plaster of paris for another 16 days. If this act as shown by the Military, is an act of Civilation & humanity in Australia, I preffer to spend the remainder of my life amongst uncivilicat Blacks, the Natives of Australia. I am positive these Race, would hawe never adhered to such low action, as the one previously mentioned. Of course, as far as I hawe understood of the patients the Medical doctor Mr Sampon acted under the orders of the Comandant Lieut. Col. Hollman. I wiche to state hier also to the Reader, that the Civilian Internees formerly employed at the hospital, ceased work on account of 23 sh. per diem being considered insufficient & on account of armistice wher entilted to the wages prevailing outside among civilication or at least, as International Law permitts, the wages as payd to Soldiers performing the same duties vic 5 sh per diem but as the Authority had refused this request, they in a body had come into the Compound to show also their protest as formerly explained, thinking, as the Governement had made Internees, wher responsible to look after them without their asistances State account of daily re guard

25/ No Sanitary work hawing being able to be


[Page 118]

performed for formerly stated reasons, the Camp is in an unmentionable state. The air is preluted with Germ infested air. The Stensh is allmost unbearable. Rubbish laying about in heaps, the Rubbish box wich used to get emptied twice daily is overfilled. The air around the Closets are unbearable as they pans in same hawe not been emptied or cleaned since the 22nd becourse all the empty Pans are locked away, & the Internees do not intend to giwe the Authorities pretext of any sort to carry out their dastardly plot, do not intend to break open the doors & so giwe them the much longer for pretext under the Name of destroying Governements property. The Internees suffered on in silence. During last Night all the Internees wher recalled from No 5 & 6 Camp wher they had been employed Roadmaking This wher don as a precaution by the Authorities to hawe all the Guards around the main camp, in case the Internees should fall to the trap, sett for us.

The Internees had to walk through the rain for miles, carrying their possessiones on their shoulders. During the afternoon 9 Internees wich had been seen speaking & encouraging the Internees not to use violence or force wher arested by the Military Police & escorted into Singh Singh Compound. Those arested wher charged with acting detrimental to the good conduct & discipline of the Camp also for being the Leaders of the socalled strike. They suffered [indecipherable] as the Camp had nor required a leader, but in a body wher resolved to ask for at least Civilised treatement & if possible our speedy release (state account of Matunga Crew & letter dated 27/ one of those wher Proffessor Bose, also the Internee Kook formerly mentioned, for hawing painted Gottstrafe England on his Convict garb & being sentenced to imprisonement. The Camp Authority under its Leadership of Lieut Col. Hollman are seeking with the dirtiest devices possible to get the Inmates of this Camp to Mutiny, but to their dis


[Page 119]

may, the Internees keep quite & bear their cross quitly. On this day the Comandant under an order issued demandet voluntary labor, to proceed to the Bush, cutt & cart firewood for our kitchens inside the Compound. If this order would not be fullfilled the Kitchens would be closed from the 26th. Thereupon as the Governement had interned the majority against their will & knowing the International as Australian Rules & regulationes. We in a body demandet of the Authorities the supply of the wood & hawe same carted to the Main gate entrance wher the Internees would take posession of same & carry it on their shoulder to the respective Kitchens.

The whole inmates of this Camp are indeet very hungry as no rationes of any sort hawe been issued for the past 3 daysfresh bread for 7 days. Though the hunger wher great in our midst everyone preffered to go hungry, than to subdue to illegal rules made by the Made Officers" wich in the majority are the Officials responsible for this Camp. 26/ On this day each Internee wher issued ½ lb bisquits in most instances broken & like dust wich had been in store for a considerable time. The taste of some of them wher horrible. The Proluted air of this Camp on account of the sanitary condition are unscribable. Everyone is of the opinion that the Authorities are bend upon to breed deadly Germs amongst our midst, so as to Kill us off, so that the civiliced world shall not hear of the dirty action comitted by the Federal Australian Governement in the treatement of the Interneesof in Australia during the 1914-1919 European Crisis , during the day the doctor Mr Sampson in company of Sergeant Grivel & the Provost Marshall wieved the unsanitary condition of this Camp. Dinnertime this day Notice wher issued that their would be a general Rollcall at 4pm Every Internee appeared to Rollcall, wich however proved a fiasco. A Nonecommissioned Officer read out to the Internees wich wher termed Revised Rules "wich wher to the effect Each internee Company will be in charge of a soldier of the Governement. In future


[Page 120]

all work inside the Compound will be done by Internees labor without pay. Each Internee in each Company will be taken in turns under the charge of the soldier of the Company. All foodstuffs & fuel for the Kitchens will not be carted into the Compound as previously but unloadet at Store & carried from their by Internees themselves. The Pans of the Waterclosets must be carried by the internees themselves outside of the Maingate at regular times, wher empty ones will be issued to them in its place. The Repatriation wich seems to be the main cause of the unrest will be notified, when the time arives. No union wage will be payd for any work. The authorities preffer to cease all work in hand.

This day also the Newspapers got stopped from being ussued to us & as the free open air cinomatograph showed every wednesday Saturday & Sunday evening the films for tonights programe wher withheld, although all those films wher hired by the camp & payd for out of the Camp Canteen fund. As upon several requests to the Comandant to grant us the Night soil cart to come into the Camp hawing being refused & the human offal of 5000 Internee gathered in 7 W.C. during the past 4 suxcessive days & in consequence the stensh thereof wher unbearable, the Internees toke matters in their own hands & discharged the Pans, per medium of the Cap drainage during the evening hours of 7 to 9 p.m. hawing the lock of the Sanitary house broken open, to get disinfectants. After the Pans had been emptied a good suply of water & disinfectants wher used by the Internees shlushing out the drainage pipe. Then the Closets itself recieved a thorough cleaning with Water & Fenol found in the Store, as our Camp wher indeet in need of same in clearing the foul air. During this procedur two Internees wher arested.

27/ During the morning the Military Police under orders searched the camp for picks, shovels or any other heavy tools, as during


[Page 121]

the forenoon several post put into the ground by Internees for the use of stretching clothes lines had been remowed & taken to the Kitchens & used as firewood, as this material wher getting scarce. Several articles wher found & confiscated. During the forenoon a wagon drove into Camp in charge of a soldier driver & several soldiers. They cleared the Sanitary Store of everything wich had been keept their ein since the commencement of the Camp & carted outside. During this day the Military Police inside of our Compound recieved Reinforcement. During the afternoon the majority of Internees, who had asisted in cleaning the premises explained Water closets wher arrested & placed in the Lockup. The Names of those Internees had been giwen by Spys interned amongst us & in the pay of the Military Authorities. A request signed by every Internee demanding the instant release & return to our midst of all internees victimised by the Authorities during this Protest wher refused. No Provission of any sort to us 5000 Internees has been issued during the last 3 days. To make the provision on hand wich had been saved by the Kitchens as our rationes hawe been issued to us daily, we had to excist Trou Rationes Our ration on this day being ¼ pint of tea for breakfast 4 ounces potatoes ¼ pint weak tea for dinner, ¼ pint of tea for supper. Nothing else. As stated previously the Comandant had refused to drive the necessary wood for the Kitchens to the gate, the Internees gathered Benshes, Stuhls tables & Clothes poles for the Kitchen use, to keep the fires going Allmost all the Open air linobenshes, manufactured by the Internees out of bush timber found its way into the Kitchen. As no food rationes had been issued to us for several days the Internees food Comptroller emptied the foodstore for the General Internees benefitt, as the food Comptroller of the Military Major Malloy had refused upon several requests by this Internee to issue to us our


[Page 122]

rations due. As the hunger of the Internees wher getting unbearable. This major Malloy told our food comptroller, that his orders of the Comandant Hollman wher to the effect not to issue food of any sort to the internees allthough asKed to giwe his statement in writing, he refused, saying, That’s my orders. In the store of our Camp wher only Cheeses, Jam, so 10lb of cheese & 12lb tin of Jam got distributed amongst each company vic 100 Internees of all ages. As several Internees felt the pinch of hunger, many a dog & cat, wich had been the Internees pets, Killed & eaten during this afternoon. Some Internees even hawe treatened, if a horse of the belonging to the Governement enters Camp the next day, would be unharnessed & Killed for eating purposses However their treat wher in vain as no horse entered Camp, but the Auto driven Vehicles wich came to take away the offal tins outside the Kitchens to the piggery, containing only the skin, intestines, & heads of the dogs & cats eaten killed the day previously. The Comandant still is trying hard to get us Internees to Mutiny for his secret purposses but in vain, as better council amongst us Internees prevail, with the few exceptiones, as stated, if they can be regardet deterimental against the Rule of this Camp. On this day the Comandant even went a step further & issued order to turn all the Water off from our Camp. Australia, think of it without cause, without justice the Authorities responsible for Pris of War in australia shut of the Water for the use of 5000 Internees behind Barbwires witch wher all with the exception of about 185 all Civilians wich had been arested for nothing more noxious than to hawe been born in Germany & of German Parents. Is this a crime. I aske the reader, are the Children born in Allied Country born differently. What would the population of Australia say, if they read an account in the Australian Newspaper giwing an account as I


[Page 123]

giwe regarding the treatement. Would they be quite. I guse Father Gergers words wich he used before the visiting Justice Harvey on March the 7th during the enquirey by this sayd Hon Judge "As true as there is a Good above me, beleave me, I am telling no untruth, when I say. It is a wonder to me, how those Men hawe stood it all, all in perfect silence. Upon this news every one rushed the taps to proccure water for the day at any rate. Than all the water ceased to flow out of the taps. During the day, as several wher in need of a drink & trying the taps layd on in diverse places they found one still running. When the military seen this they looked for the Valve, to turn this off also, but wher unable to find it. They called the Internee, who had been looking after all the taps & valves inside our Camp & requested of him to be shown wher the valve was. However this Internee gused a lie, to the General Camps benefitt, & answered, that he wher unable to do so on account not Knowing himself. In company of the Soldier this Internee made a pretented search for the valve, but needless to say without avail. The Internee had covered this valve with a bag, that’s why, it had been overlooked. From this one single valve 5000 Internees procured their necessary water for the following days untill everything wher settled. Also all the Water used in the Kitchens wher got secretly from this tap, greatly to dismay of the Officers comanding this Camp. First they tried with hunger to fall to the deadly trap sett for us all Internees when this failed they tried with Water also. Herein they failed also & the trap still remains open, but not to close on us Internees through our doings or fault. For discipline is the daily Watchword. Shouting & speaking to Soldiers strictly forbidden.


[Page 124]

In short everyone to mind his own business. If the Soldiers wher looking for trouble, not to answer, but to retreat to their Barracks. It wher the cool way & the discipline Keept amongst us Internees, wich brought us many a admirer from the guards & their Officers to sympatise with us. The Lieut Col. Hollman the Comandant had expressed his View on the day when the company Comanders resigned in the presence of Mr Zimmerman the Head company Comander formerly President of this Camp, that within 4 days we Internees would come crawling to him & eat out of his hand. The time giwen by this Comandant had passed & his desire had been in vain. Several Officers & Soldiers encouraged us, to stick it out, Knowing we wher in our Rights & that the Comandant would hawe to giwe in. As the Closets hawe not been cleansed since the last forcible cleaning, the Pans are overfilled & the air proluted with foul air. Upon another request to grant us the waggon to enable us to attend to the Closets wher refused this day. To let more of his spite loose, the Comandant withheld the Films wich had arived from Sydney for the Private Picture Shows inside the camp, wich wher enterprises of Civilian Internees. To enable us to stick out in our right & justified cause, as long as possible, the Butcher shops, wich also wher civilian Internees property & Bakershops asisted generously in giwing all the foodstuffs on hand voluntary to the Internees Kitchens. This wher a great asistance indeet, as the Cooks, had indeet used up the Remnants of the Remnants. The Coffees & Restaurants wher requested by Representation, to pool all foodstuffs & hand same over to the Kitchens for the benefitt of Internees generally. Upon this presentation several Private Persons of the more wealthy class handet foodstuffs in smaler quantities willingly over to the Internees Kitchens for General, use, to ease the


[Page 125]

Hunger prevailing inside the compound. All the Shops willingly gawe also their firewood wich they had bought before the Protest "of the military for the Kitchens use. The Butcher Shops, also gawe their big Chopping blocks, so our Kitchen wher providet with another days fuel, to the dismay of the Comandant. During the afternoon following Notise wher issued us: The Comandant has been in reciept of several views concerning the present unrest in the Compound. It is hereby giwen for general information that I. Every Internee muss appear on paradeground twice per day, as formerly, when the bugle sounds. II Every company will select again its Company Comanders, wich resigned at the comencement of the present unrest. When this request has been fullfilled, will the Camp Authorities issue new revised Rules to the Compound, and when they think fitt will so don hawe the present restrictiones withdrawn. Signed R Hollman Comandant. On the following day, everything wher quit inside the Compound. A Notice wher issued to use 28/2. It is herby notiefied for general information, that all Internees inside the Compound, who hold exccemption cards, are to hand same to the Police at the Maingate not later than 2 p.m. this day. This does not aply to Internees who hold excemptiones for medical Reasones. Signed D Drumond Lieut. Provost Marshal. As no food had been issued to us in either shape or form for days past. A smal committee amongst us Internees, issued the following petition to be signed by the Internees, to be handet to the comandant. The Camp demands I. The Authorities to issue us instantly foodstuffs. Firewood ectra. II The instantly return of those Internees, who hawe been arrested in consequence of this by the Authorities called strike. III A Garantie from a responsible Quarter (a person promise not to be accepted) when the release, or the repatriation will take place. IV Instant release or the repatriation of those who wich to remain in Australia. V. The instant remowal


[Page 126]

by the Authorities of Col. Holman Captain Bardsley VI. To the in the Camp required work as the Sanitary Gang, Cooks & Cookmates muss be payd by the required daily wages. VII. The Camp is in a body behind the Person who brings this our terms before the respektive authorities in charge of Internees in Australia. As stated previously no foodstuff of any sort being issued to us & the Governement foodstufs saved of formerly rationes hawing being used we excisted on Iron Ration, made out of the foodstuffs presented to the Camp by Buisness & Civilian Internees amongst our midst mostly. Our daily food on this day wher the following Breakfast ¼ pint weak tea & a bit poridge. No bread. Dinner ½ pint peasup & ¼ pint tea for supper ¼ pint of tea. Is it a wonder to the Reader if I say Hunger wher great amongst our midst. But we wher compelled to live on this, as the foodstuffs available to us Internees would last untill Sunday next under the issue of the amount as stated previously. I do not excagerate when I state hier, that I hawe seen Cats & dogs hawe been Killed & eaten by some hungry Internees, not becourse they wher fond of eating the Kind of diet, but wher compelled on account of hunger. The Hide, intestines & Heads of this animals wher the only thing the offal tins contained taken out daily for delivery to the Piggery as per Governement Contracts. Hawing carried the Heads of this animals is excageration of the Daily reports. However with daily reports, I will deal later separately, to show the Public, how the press endeavores to misslead the public now, as during the past & Keeps the Public of the true facts in ignorance, out of fear of the Censor. Several Internees, who wher afraid of loosing their pets Keept same tied up inside their Barraks. I hawe seen Cats tied up, like dogs & miowing all day long, as they are not used to this


[Page 127]

[newspaper cuttings March 7, 1919 – not transcribed]


[Page 128]

[newspaper cuttings – not transcribed]


[Page 129]

kind of treatement. However only another 2-3 days & also their turn will come, as allready a Notice has been issued by the Camp. That all Internees, who are possessors of Cats & Dogs to hand their Names in to the Internees food comptroller, to take possession of same as demondet, when our present foodstuffs should run out. The Internees toke this Canibal step in prefference of dying of starvation.

This happened all in a Civilised world & a country who gets governed under the flag whos motto is, justice & fair play. All Officers communications with either the Deffence Departement, Consuls or any other Official outside has been stopped by the order of the Comandant, to prevent the Internees from letting the outside world know, Who does Australia treats their Prisoners of War. The Internees wished & demandet an Enquiry, so that both sides could settle their griviances. However to this proposal is the comandant opposed. On several ocassion he as uttered I’l starve the Buggers into submission. What his submission is, however is a mistery unknown to the inmates of this Camp. I state that this Comandant rules in Holdworthy like the Zar in Russia. He seems to hawe forgotten all laws regarding Civilication & Humanity, & there is nothing vulgar enough to use, to get his demands. The Internees are willing to clean their own Camp free of charge to the Authorities, also [indecipherable] all necessary cooking. The money needet for the payment of such labor, to be taken out of the Prisoner Canteen funds, as Tousends of Pounds lays their to our credit idly, as I will prove to the reader at the finishe of my chapter, regarding this socalled strike. The Internees demand that at least all the foodstuffs & firewood be brought by the Authorities to the Camp gates, wher the Inmates will carry same on their shoulders to the respektive Kitchens. As, with the exception of 3% interned in this Camp are Civilians


[Page 130]

& not combatants, We adher to the International Rules made by the Hague Convention & signed by all Nationes England includet that the Governement who detains Prisoners of War, is responsible to food clothe & house same. That the treatement shall be human. As armistice has been signed in Europe months ago & we are 14000 Miles from the field of battle, we in a body, at least those who hawe families in Australia depending on them think it injustifiable for the Governement to keep us detained, especially as Reports in the dailys state daily of the arival of Pris of War, wich had been captured & released by the Etente Powers. Theirfore, We think we are justified the Know of the reasones Why does the Australian Federal Governement keeps us detained against our will, longer than is necessary & so wastes Public Money needet in the Upkeep of this Camp, wich could be used of a more beneficial source to Australia itself.

This Camp, Holdsworthy is indeet a disgrace to Australia & its principles. As the doings of Germany hawe been spread broadcast by a Capitalistic Press, so the doings of the Internal Affairs the treatement of Pris of War includet will be spread broadcast & I will predict that it will take years for Australia to wipe out that remaining stigma, as Australia will be in need of capitalistic assistance in the near future they will certainly meet with a certain amount difficulties in procuring the much needet Capital, for how will a Capitalist trust the promisses of the Governement, who has confiscated, all the Money & Buismen as well as shares, belonging to Enemy born subject, if nationaliced or not invested in Australia & so has ruined many. Who can see into the not too distant future, who are friends at present, will be enemys than


[Page 131]

To return to the life of the Camp. I hawe seen 2/6 being offered for one well known Capstan Cigarette, used to be procurable at the rate of 8 for 3 pence previous to the Protest or Strike & still the offerer had to goe without, as non wher forthcoming. During the Evening of the day 12 Internees, in all instances, old & feeble Internees colapsed on account of Weakness, the result of hunger. They wher taken to the gate & handet to the Military, the Provost Marshall Drumond promissing, that he would do all in his power to see that they would receive food. I heard that they hawe been taken charge of by the ambulance & taken to the hospital for treatement. During this afternoon a young Internee to escape the pangs of hunger & so preffered life inside jail, feinted a escape, by going through the Barbwire fence in broad daylight while guards, wher stationed all around. One guard fired a shot into the air, & the soldier Internee remained on the spot outside the fence untill the Police arived & the Darlinghurst jail 28/ The following Notice wher issued to the Camp. A Muster Parade will be held at 8.30am on March 1st (Saturday) & if the dicipline is satisfactory & no absentees to Company Comanders are elected for every Company the Authorities will confer with the Company Comanders with a View to remowe some of the present restrictiones Signed R Holman.

During the evening, the Internees who had been arested, becourse they had poured the Contents of the W.C. through the canal of the Camp deep drainage as no other escape could be found, to get out of the unsatisfactory state of Affairs concerning our health, wher transferred to the Darlinghurst Jail, handcuffed under a heavy armed guard.

[Transcribed by Margaret Broadfoot for the State Library of NSW]