[source: http://acms.sl.nsw.gov.au/_transcript/2011/D11077/a2920.htm#a2920167]
[Page 1]
No 6
Strike continued
March 1 / During the Muster parade called for by the Camp Authorities for this morning toke place, but indeet it proved a very stragling one, as part of the Internees sayd, first send in food then we fall in on parade. Those who refused were told by Lieut. Bardoly, the former Provost Marshall full present Intelegence Officer, to proceed to the gate. Over 2000 Internees volunteered to preffer anything, than go on the Parade hungry. The first 171 Internees wich arrived, wher led out, but when the Officer in question seen half of the Camp Internees willing to goe outside he ordered to shut the Main gate, wich order the Sentry promptly obyed. Their upon this Officer selected out of the Internees outside the Gate 12 Men, wich he ordered away to be interred into the No 2 Compound (Singh Singh) The remainder wher taken to the Soldiers sportsground, wher they remained until 7 p. m, when they were permitted to return to the Main compound, all their Names having previously been taken by the Police. Only 1 cup of water each wher issued to the Internees during the day, but no food. During the afternoon the Internees wher informed per medium of the Camp food comptroller, that for tea we would be issued Coffee & Bully Beef. So we received ¼ pint of Coffee ¼ lb Bully Beef & ½ bisquits each for our tea. This wher our first Rationes issued for 1 week. During the evening parade almost all Internees wher their with the exception of those previously mentioned. During the Tea hour 1 Internee placardet the Camp on several places, advising the Internees to select a Strike Committee without delay, to settle the questions in disbute by fo both parties. Ten Internees wer arrested at 10 p. m by the Police

[Page 2]
Rationes lost through Strike
Meat 12500 lbs.
Bread 7 days 3 days half rationes 27500 lb.
Condensed Milk 1470 ordinary tins
Sugar 5000 Lbs
Cheese 2500 "
Potatoes 10542 "
Vegetables 6566 "
Salt 1092 "
Pepper 17 "
Coffee 234 "
Tea 83 "
Without the Peas Beans Sago or porridge Oattmieal

[Page 3]

(Continued from Page 1)
& taken to the Lockup, wher he wher charged with, inciting the internees to riot to put Sing Singh Any reasonable person must admit, that this Mass charge is unjust. As this Camp has been without a Committee previous & during the Strike & how can harmony resign between the Camp & the Officials if their is no Representative, especially now after the socalled Strike, to lead the Camps back into its usual [indecipherable]. They also came the next morning to arrest the other Signature Internee but as this Internee had been selected Secretary to the Odewly formed Committee warned the Police, if this Men wher arrested, the whole Committeee would resign in consequence, he wher only reprimandet. On this Night the Internees elected from each Company 1 Internee, to form the big Committee, from those they selected four Men to form the small Committee, to enter into negitation with the Authorities On the second March, the whole Meeting met and carried the following resolutions without a single protest, wich is the following as presented to the Authorities. I. This Camp demand the imidiate return to the main compound of all those men, who were taken out of the Compound on account of the present troubles 2) The Sanitary arrangements (Nightsoil only) will carry on as previously, should however the Men be asked to perform the work for the Soldiers also, than their wages should be increased as it is prevailing in this Country. III. The opening of Recreation ground from 6 a m til 5 30 p,m, IV. The Camp wishes to attend Rollcall ones per day (in the morning) V. Reprovisioning this Camp. VI. It is the intention of this Camp, to make a detail account of the happenings & of the treatement received wich the Internees received during the recent trouble to the official visitor. A representation will be made to the Official visitor to obtain informationes regarding our

[Page 4]

fate (Repatriation – Release) VII All provisions withheld during the recent trouble to be made good either in goods or Cash. If Cashe, same to go to the Canteen fund. VIII Bakers will resume work for the one rate of 8 shilling per day, giving a weeks notice, at the old rates, pending a decision IX Little items to be left until the small Comittee has meet with the Authorities. Representation wher made in consequence of this Meeting with the Officials in charge of this Camp & following answers wher received Question No. 1. That Strike Pris. Return to Camp Answer: This matter is under consideration. Question that Bakers resume at old rates for 14 days whilst waiting for their demands at the hands of the Military Authorithis for 5 shilling per day: Answer: If Bakers resume they do so at old rates or not at all. Their is nothing to prevent them to present their Case. That Sanitary Gang & Cleaners return to old rate, but that this work should be given in turn to all ready to do this. Answer. The efficiency to do this services to the general health of the Camp is largely dependet upon the permancy of employment, with continual change, could not give. Question: That the full of bread are not available, the rationes should be made up as sugested half bread half flour Answer What will the Camp do with flour, Answer by the Internees Comittee The Authorities must furnish the wood to enable us to bake bread, as their are 4 private Bakers oven inside the Camp. Answer by Major Hollborrow: I think it will right itself quickly as their is some trouble with the Military getting constant Bakers. Question: as an earnest goodwill that the Col. Request for Comittee be put on a good footing we would aske that the

[Page 5]

for granting Questiones 1-4 be fixced. Answer. The election of a Comittee is for the well fare of the Camp & if it is not done it will be f to your disadvantage. During the General Meeting held in the Austrian Hall to open to all Internees Father Feiger wher selected Comittees president & spokesman. On this day the Austrian section of the Internees received following reply from the Swedish Consul, after this Section had made a written & verbal complaint regarding the treatement received, also stating some demands to the Representive of Austria in Australia. March 3rd 1918. Reffering to your comunication dated the 28th ultimo & my verbal statement yesterday I beg to inform you, that I have despatched a lengthy cable to His Swedish Majestys Minister in London advising him of the present position of affairs at the Camp with an urgent request that his excellency will take the necessary steps to obtain from the Imperial Authorities the aproxcimate date of the comencement of release. I have also sent an urgent telegram to the Honorable acting Minister of Deffence in conection with this matter & hope to recieve an early reply wich will of course be imidiately transmitted to you & I am quite shure that pending the receipt of the desired information the Austro Hungarian Internees will continue to conduct themselves as in the same excemplary fashion as hereto fore. Signed Acting Consul General for Sweden. During this day all the Internees who had been taken out of the Compound for not falling in on Musterparade previously mentioned, wher taken before the Military Doctor at the hospital & excamined, if the constitution of each Internee would permit same to undergoe punishement with or without hard labor. All wher permitted after signing each

[Page 6]

one documents wher permitted to return to the Camp. During the whole day the Sanitary Wagons wher indeet buisy carting out the Rubbish wich had gathered inside the Compound for about1 week. Four lipdrays were employed to empty the Rubbish bin wich used to be emptied 3 times per diem. The account of the concentrated gathering of the Rubbish being permitted to remain for close on a week, maggots wher to be found under plentiful & over 1 Inch long, during the day only ¼ lb of bisquits wher issued to each Internee, all other stores wher still withheld, all though we all fell in on parade as usual. As the Firewood wher not carted into the compound, the Internees had to carry same on their shoulders from the Camp Railway depot into the Camp & placed out side the Kitchens. The logs wich the Internees wher compelled to carry into the compound, tolke in the majority 2 Men to carry as they wher indeet over 300 in weight each. On March the 4 10 Internees received 1 loaf of bread weighing 4 lb in weight, to be divided. This whas the bread ration for the Internees for the next 24 hours. Herewith I state all official correspondence between the Camp Comittee & Officials of the Military in charge of Pris of War in Australia.
Requests of the Conference with Lieut Col. Holman:
Permission is granted to publish all matters in conection with the present Camp affairs on the Noticeboard. II. The desire for the presence of the Swedish Consul was granted. III. The release of Strike Prisoners was refused. The Col sayd. The International regulation of this Camp are viewed with graive concern by the Government owing owing to the defying moumers of the inhatlitants. The Matter of the restrictions is in the hands of the Government, not mine. Ieau

[Page 7]

January 1919 was a different Camp from 1915. New structures having being erected by the Internees galore. Their was the Gurn Vereiu 2 big adjoining hills, made out of bushtimber & covered with Rubberoid, a heavy Atheletic C;ub, called Deutche Eiche" German Choral Society, Chess Club Artists Studios, Libery, Hot Tub Bath, New Austrian Theater 2 Boxing Clubs, Skating Ring, latterly turned into a Picture Show 3 New Kitchens each measuring 10 squareyards, in wich were employed 1 Chef 2 Cooks 1 Nightcook 2 Butchers & 2 fireman in each in adition to Cook helps & Washersup & 1 Provission Stewart. The Cooks & Butchers remain 12 weeks, Rouseabouts 4 weeks Chefs as long as suited

[Page 8]

This day following Notice.
Copy of Cable: London 14/3 1919. To Swedish Consul General Sydney. Acording instructiones just received from Viena, please make payments only to German Austrianes from date of receipt of this telegram, & refuse subrentions to all subjects of other states formed in territory of former Austria-Hungary, advising them that this refusal is a consequence of the remittance of these other stataes to furnish money for the purpose stop. As German Austrians are to be considered Austrianes of German Nationality who have their legal domicile in ober & nieder Ostereich, Steiermurk Salzburg, Kaernter Deutch Bohmen, Sudentenlander & Tyrol with the exception of Trentino
Signed
Swedish Charge D Affairs.

[Page 9]

[Continued from page 7]
not consent to anything now, but will represent your demands, to the Government. The Prisioners are assured of a grave concern for wich they may be punished severely & they will be tried by Court marshell IV Money due to Workers will performed up to the strike will be payed at the first opportlunity. V. Bakers may work under the old condition until the Authorities give decision of rates of wages to be payd (Maxcium 5 shilling) 6) Sanitary & Cleaning Workers to go on as usual until the Authorities decide otherwise. The sanitary work in future to be don only for the Camp of Internees & not for the soldiers. 7. / Parkes are to be opened as usual time on Monday March 3th 8/ Proviosiones including firewood & oil must be drawn from a depot out side of this Camp. The loss of provisiones during the strike will not be made good either by money or goods. 9/ Rollcall once each day in the morning will be disidet by the Authorities the Colonel having no objections to it 10/ The lettercarrier to be reinstated was granted. 11/ Repatriation or release cannot be definitively fixed, the Colonel knows nothing about it, but he expressed himself that "It would not be long now" 12/ Company Comanders. One Soldier for 2 Companies, one Officer in charge of Soldiers will act at the same time as Camp Representative 13/ Permission is granted to write a letter to the Minister of Deffence, asking for the apointement of a Commission to meet Delegates of this Camp for the purposes of holding an inquirey into the causes of the recent troubles & our treatment in conection theirwith 14/ The Representatives of each Company are requested to attend a Meeting at the Dramatic Club at 10 a. m. on Monday morning the [indecipherable] March . The Secretary

[Page 10]

Meeting of March 3th 1919. Present 37 Delegate, nonattending 8. the Meetilng wher open to the Internees. The reason of the meeting wher the report & answers upon our diverse demands by the Comandant 1) The delegates in a body (each speaking of (struck out) on behalf of the Internees of his Company, came to the conclusion that the whole Camps demands that all the Restriction be lifted imidiately, becourse the action the Internees have been forced to take, has been in the interesse of the Camp. 2) Representives of the Camp Bakers being present & same sanctioned the following: To proceed with the work under the old rates for 14 days, but to demand the highest pay, payable by the Authorities. The permission to resume work by the Authorities is instantly expekted. 3/ Sanitary & Camp Cleansers. On account of the action taken by the Sanitary gang in hawing taken steps with the Authorities on their own behalf without hawing first consulted the Comittee, this Gang to be censored. At same time each Representative of diverse Companys, to select the Names of Internees willing to perform this Class of work & a list to be handet to the Officer of work of the department, so that the work shall be more evenly distributed. 4/ Provisioning of the Camp. It has been carried that each Company shall find 1 Man per day to carry in the provission from the depot into the Camp. These Internees to be payd for labor done out of Canteen funds (vise 1 Shilling for 4 hours work. 5)/ Commission. It has been carried that a letter shall be forwardet to the Minister of Deffence to request a Comission. This Comission shall investigate

[Page 11]

the reasons of the last Camp unrest, also to investigate in regards of treatment received during this unrest, at the hands of the officiating Military Authorities. This Comission to excist of: One Delegate (not necessarily a Internee) to (struck out)wich shall be choosen by the Camp & a Delegate of the Deffence Departement. Above this Comission to preside 1 Judge. This shall take place instantly 6/ Company Comanders The advice of the Colonel to give us Soldiers as Company commanders also one Officer as Camp Representative to be taken as read. 7/ Hospital It has been carried that all sick Internees, who have been thrown out of Hospital during the Protest shall attend "sick parade "those unable to walk, to be taken charge of by the Military Authorities & transported to the hospital per ambulance handwagon. The Secretary.
Statement of propositions made to Col. Holman on March 3 th 1919
1) Request that strike prisoners be returned to the Camp
2) Bakers to resume under at old rates terms for 14 days whilst waiting for their demands at the hands of the Authorities for 5/shs per day.
3) Sanitary Men & Cleaners: return at old rates, but that this work shall be done should be given in turn to all who are ready to do this. Provissions to be moved from depot by Internees who are to be payd by Canteen. Letter to Minister of for Deffence that Comission for inquiry be appointed, as granted by Col Holman. As an earnest of good will that the Colonel will grant our request for a Comittee to be put on a good footing, we would aske that the date for granting points 1-5 be fixced. Rollcall ones a day, as advocated by Lieu. Col Holman be send for

[Page 12]

approval to the Authorities. > His Honor Justise Harvey the official Visitor to this Camp wher send the following: Dear Sir. Enclosed please find letter to Minister for deffence wich you promissed to forward. May I ask your Kind favour & that you would be good enough to forward the other letter to the Swiss Consul Mr Olaf Pauss Pitt Street Sydney. It is somewhat irregular but as you know so well know, we live in irregular times. Yours most respectfully Chairman of Committee. >. The following wher enclosed in this corespondence. To the acting Consul for Switzerl. In charge of German Affairs. Sir. We herewith submit to you two Resolutions wich was passed unanimously at a Public Meeting of this Camp as follows 1) That this Camp at a Public Meeting, demands the resignation of Olaf Pauss, acting Consul for Switzerland in charge of German Affairs, because No. A That Of false statements made by him, as to the conditions of this Camp & B) of absolute neglect of his solemn & bounden duties with regard to our interests. Furthermore a Copy of this resolution be sent A to Olaf Paus, as acting Swiss Consul B. To the Federal Governement of Australia C to the German Governement. And that the German Governeme 0n1. t be requested to appoint the Consul for Spain to take Charge of our affairs. We remain Sir Chairman of Comittee > To the Honorable the Acting Minister for Deffence Melbourne. Sir This Camp earnestly requests a Comission of Enquiry into the recent happenings & our treatment theirin, because it is the firm belier of this Camp that Lieut Col Holman meditated Bloodshed. Lt Col

[Page 13]

State letter forwarded regarding Newyeahrs day in leaving Wifes & Children on visiting ground during rain & enclose No 10.

[Page 14]

[Continued from page 12]
Holmans own words to a Comittee wher "It is only by a mere coincidence, that a tragedy was averted" Furthermore we earnestly requests that such commission be composed of
I One judge to preside II One Member chosen by the Governement III One Member tho not an Internee choosen by the Camp. And that this Comission of Inquiry sit forthwith, becourse the Comandant of Camps does not earnestly & honestly desire to keep order in this Camp. Chairman of Comittee.
Proceedings from March 2-5 March II Propositions placed before Lieut Col Holman by the small committee March III Col. Holman answer submitted by them to big Comittee, considered & settled. In meantime 141 men wher taken to Doctor for medical examination prior to Court Martial. Smal Comittee desires to see Col at once. He was not to be seen, but Major Holborone interviewed. Stated he would do his best, but Justice Harvey would interview Comittee of 10 on Tuesday March 4th. 4th Big Comittee addet 5 Mambers to usual committee, who drew up than a report. (A) acount of events from Febr. 19th until March 3th B the request of the Camp. Interview with Justice Harvey at 2. p. m. A. A general report for the whole camp & special report by Austro Hungarian Section was read by father Jerger to Justice Harvey B. Requests wher presented 1 Request: That all Strike prisoner to be released. Answer. If Comittee assures me that the Camp is not in rebellion, I will do my outmost to harve them released. Request Carrying foodstuffs. Answer Will do his best to arrange & with Col Request Comission of enquiry. Answer. Will do his best with

[Page 15]

with Deffence department also send our letter on. Request Release & Repatriation Answer: I will make strong representations seek actively release to the Deffence Departement for speeding up of repatriation, respectively release & I will make representation to give people who are going to be repatriated a chance of settling their affairs outside Request Rollcall once per day Answer He would submit it to the Col. Later on the Justice Harvy walked through the Camp with father Jerger saw Kitchens, lavatories, general appearance of the Camp & the air of the Internees. Small Comittee saw Major Holborow Col Holman being absent I Requests. Post Office. Answer He will remind Col Holman on Wednesday of his orders reinstating Mr Anhert to rectification of oversight re Mr Kohn. Request Carying Provisions Answer. Will try to fix matters as before the Strike, also reinstating of lamps cleaners Request Shortage of Provisions. Answer They will be got & issued Bread, Sugar & Jam instead of Cheese Request Payment of Kitchen staff Answer sees no reason why they should be payd during the strike Request. Sunday visitors Answer Not yet. If fresh cases of influenca in Sydney break out. It would be too much risk. March 5 Small Comittee meets I A general meeting to be called II Mr Blaukenlurgen the Internees food comptroller was present explaining his routine of daily duties. He was authorised by the Comittee to interview the Major imidiately re carrying & providing of provision & rationes & to request the authorityes to bring the State of Affairs back to prestrike conditions

[Page 16]

He will refuse to accept Jam instead of cheese from the Provisunt Master & that he will furnish the Comittee with a written report regarding provisions owing to the Camp before the Strike. To the acting Minister for Deffence the following wher forwardet Sir. We beg to request you to grant us permission to send the following Cable to the Swiss Legation in London for transmission by them to the Foreign Office in Germany. Swiss Legation London Main German Concentration Camp requests inform Foreign Office Berlin transfer German Interest from Sydney Swiss Consul to Spanish Consul "We further beg to request you to change the old order of roll call twice every day (Morning & evening) as hitherto to allow us to parade for roll call only ones every day in the morning We approached Lt Col Holman on the matter who sayd that he had no objections to our request wich however had to be decidet by the Authorities. Awaiting your early reply we remain Sir Yours truly Chairman of Comittee. Statement handet to Hon, Justice Harvey on his Official Visit by Comittee of 10 Internees choosen by the Camp. On the nights from Wednesday to Thursday Feb. 19th to 20th two Internees attempted to excape three shots wher fired, one whisling through the Camp. Friday Febr. 21th The following Notice appeared on the Notice board (Refer to Notice) On the same day the Internees declined as a protest to fall in for parade, As punishement the tea tubs wher emptied into the Compound by order of an Officer Sat Feb. 22th All work ceased as a protest to fall in for parade. Sunday Feb 23 In consequence of the breadwaggons not entering the compound as usual the majority of the Internees, wher not suplied with

[Page 17]

bread. All keys of the Camp stores containing tools, disinfecting & other tools wher taken of the foreman by the order of the Authorities. Monday Febr. 24th. The state of the lavatories & latrines not havaing being cleaned since Friday Night (usually cleaned three times per day) wher in an abhorring state. All banking money & registered letters were also stopped, the Canteen was closed forthwith. This day bread rations five loafs (a 7lb weight each) per each 160 Men. In adition to this came 71/2 hard buisquits for each man. During the afternoon all sick people wher send back from the hospital, to the Main Compound except 5 Cases. Nine Internees wher removed from the Main Compound, vic three to the old Mens compound & 6 were send to Singh Singh. During the same afternoon a Mashine Gun was put up on the newly errected tower, giving it a clear range over the western part of the Compound. With the object of having all the Men concentrated in the Main Compound, the working parties of the outlaying Camps wher recalled having to walk several Miles in the rain & dark. Tuesday Febr. 25th No bread this day nor any other rationes safe the ecking out of the remnants. All Newspapers & Camp Cinopictures wher stopped. A General parade being called for Wednesday afternoon was abandoned by order of an Officer The Sanatory Pans wher emptied by volunteirs about 7 p. m into the sewer running through the Camp, wich wher well flushed with Water & as much phenol as was obtainable. Thursday Febr 27 All tools & accessories for cleaning purposses

[Page 18]

were removed by the Authorities. In the afternoon the Men who had emptied the pans on the previous night, in order to relieve the Camp of the stench wich had become unbearable were arrested Then the water was turned off partially & would harve been turned off altogether, only becourse the Soldier failed to find a certain valve (Evidence of Camp Water Police) Friday 28th No rations wathever. At 930 p. m a notice was posted by the Provost Marshall on the Notice boards in the Camp, that, A Muster parade will be held at 830 a. m on Saturday Marcht & if the discipline is satisfactory & no absentees, company comanders elected for each Company, the Authorities will confer with the company commanders with a view to remove some of the present restriction. Saturday March 1 A 815 a. m the Mashine Guns on the 2 towers began to fire. All troops wher mobilised & posted around the Camp. A parade of Internees toke place at 830 a. m. attendet by a number of Men, but many not coming on account of the fiasco of last Wednesdays roll call. Captain Bardly ordered all non attending parade to the Maingate. About 2000 Men went and from these a batch of about 150 wher removied out of the Compound & 12 wher sent to Singh Singh. Those 150 Men, on the recreation ground from 845 a. m untill 6 p. m. without any food. In the afternoon, upon a cert the representation of certain Internees to the Colonel, he send into the camp 7 biscuits per Men and 1 lb. Tin of preserved Meat for 4 Men. All Internees appeared

[Page 19]

thereupon on parade as usual. During the evening one delegate of each Company was elected to form a Comittee, to meet the Colonel Sunday March 2th Rationes wher issued. Her it might be mentioned that on February 28th the following Notice upon the boards in substance, that the propritors of Cats & dogs should give in their Names to the food-comptroller Mr Blankenhagen so that the animals could be used as food for the hungry Internees. As a matter of fact, dogs & cats haive allreadly been consumed. It might be further stated that private provissiones in small quantities wher collected for general consumption Austro Hungarian Section The Austro & Hungarians dit attend to rollcall until Wednesday Febr. 26th and attendet to their sanitary arrangements all the time. In spite of with obedience they received the same treatement as the rest throughout. Therefor after Wednesday they declined to attend to Rollcall. German Concentration Camp Liverpool March 7th 1919. On behalf of the Comittee. To this the following reply wher received by the Comittee in writing from Official Visitor, the honourable the Justice Harvey. I beg to inform you of the steps that I have taken, as a result of my interview with you & certain other Internees, speaking on behalf of the Camp on Tuesday instant. I have relied on your collective assurance that the disobidience to order for parades & the strike or as I preffer to call it the mutiny against the performance of the ordinary fatigues in the Camp was not in its initiation. The result of the preconcerted action. I accept your assurance

[Page 20]

that it was a general impulse act prompted by irritation at what the Camp conceived to be injustice in the closing of the recreation ground. I also accept your further assurance, that their will be no further action of this sort, but that all orders of the Camp administration will be carried out as they have been in the past. I have accordingly, as I promises ed requested the departement to excercise clemency and to withdraw the presecutli prosecution of the 141 Men of course may what the departement will do, but I hope it will see its way clear to do as I aske and that in the end the trouble of last week will ultimately result in the Camp matters working with less friction, than has been shown of late. I found all except 3 of the Men who wher interned placed in No 2 Compound (Singh Singh) have been replaced in the General Compound with except to the remaining 7, I cannot see my way clear to make any recomendation. As to the enquiry into the recent events I have only to state, that I have allready sayd, that I do not see what purpoases would be served as their does not seem to be any serious dispute as to the facts. Your memoranda, has been forwardet to Melbourne. You haive permission to write and aske for an Enquiry. I have as requested made a request to the departement with respekt to the release & repatriation. If this request to the Departement can be accedet to, it will in my opinion do a lot to allay the present unrest. In conclussion may I beg of you personaly to use your bst endeavors & prevent friction between the various elements in the Camp. From correspondence recieved their is by no means, unanimity in your counsels. I feel shure

[Page 21]

your aim, as it must be mine, is to consider, what will make for the wellfare of the Internees as a whole & not of any particular section no matter how noisy or agressive it may be. Signed J. M. Harvey Official Visitor. To this letter the Comittee answered in the following: To his Honor Mr Justice Harvey Supreme Court Sydney Dear Sir. We beg to thank you for your esteemed favor of March 6th May we avert to four points (1) "I also accept your further assurance that their will be no further action of this sort, but that all orders of the Camp administration will be carried out, as they have been in the past" We thank you for the tribute contained in the last sentence. It is well deserved. But to the first part that you accept "assurance that their will be no further action of this sort", may we state with due respect that any individual or body in this Camp can only such blind obedience (1) When commands ar just. (2) when good conduct & merrit are duly recognised (3) When only the guilty are punished and the punishment is reasonable (4) When the conduct of those in charge shows some goodwill instead of, as at the moment of writing A fresh area of spitefull restrictions:- as delay in issuing rations giving only part rations, forbidding Caffees, bakeries, butcheries, impeding the carrying of provission ectra. Thos showing once again a deliberate Campaign, to goad the Internees to a breaking point and further proving a deliberate intent to forment dissatisfaction. Under such circumstances we can only Apeal to our fellow countryman and Internees

[Page 22]

to act with the heroic self restraint and patience as you admit they have done in the past. We appeal – we cannot assure. (ii) "ther does not seen to be any serious offence dispute as to the facts". It would be strange indeet to dispute experience wich can be attended by about 5000 Men. But a Commission of Enquirey is gravely necessary because these indisputeable facts carry on their face A charge of wanton Murder Provocation with intend to Murder. (III) From corespondence wich I haive received I find their is by "no means unanimity in your Counsels" -) If these corespondence question the representative character of our Comittee the we respecktfully point our that our Comittee as at present constitudet is a most representative body this Camp ever had. Australian Parliaments are usualy accepted as most representative bodies, and yet rarely more that 60% (per cent) vote. Thus Parliaments represent about 40% of the voters. We are a long way more representative . (B) "It may be that the Corespondence question the unanimity of opinion among ourselves. We have as many opinion as heads on many questions. But on the following we are absolutely one (I) The injustice of our imprisonment. II The wanton cruelty of our imprisonement. III The savagery of punishing 5000 Men for a few. (4) The worse than savagery to take away our bread, meat and water. That surrounding unarmed Men with troops ready to fire. Hawing first goaded them to breaking point

[Page 23]

proves a murderous intent. Is it a question of unanimity of action. ? Than what wonderfull unity is proven by the fact that – without premeditation, without plan, without leaders – All Civilians in the German Compound refused to attend roll call as a protest. And two special musters, being without leaders or plan still – wher yet only attendet by 50% of the Internees. Your corespondence, we feel certain, are individuals whose judgement is unbalanced by the fear of affending those in power. They therefore condone every injustice and denounce any and every protest. These few infortunate men are found everywher and form the strongest bulwark for the oppressor. IV I feel shure your aim, is as it must be mine is to consider what will make for the welfare of the Internees as a whole & not of any particular section, no matter how noisy or agressive they it may be. - I & each Member of the Comittee, can assure your Honor that in every step we haive taken, we have only one end in view, the good of the whole Camp, and not of any section, least of all the noisy section. (V) Their are four Men in Singh Singh not arrested during the Strike, not 5. (VI) The following Notice appeared on the Notice Board A. ap/76 C. Camps Holder 7/4/19. It is notiefied for general information that applications will be received from voluntary workers for the supply of firewood to the Compound. The workers will be payd at the rates previously obtaining, namely 1/- for a day of 7 hours in acordance with Camp Rules No 96. (except in special cases wher special rates are providet. ) If a satisfactory response is not forth-

[Page 24]

coming this ration will not be furnished from any other source. Signed R. Holman Lt. Col. Comandant C. Camp. - At a general Muster parade on Wednesday Febr. 27th [indecipherable] Col. Holman ordered that all provissions must be brought into the Compound by the Internees from a depot outside. And in this new order (7/3 19) he intimates that unless the internees cut wood in the bush he will not supply at all. May we ask your Honor to kindly forward a copy of your letter & this answer to Melbourne. We remain Dear Sir Yours most respecktfully (Signed) Charles Jerger. Chairman of the Comittee On March 5th Our food rations wher still very short issued by the Authorities. (State diverse Paperaccounts) All business places & shops inside the Camp, had to remain closed, because haiving given all the eatable stores in their possession voluntary to the benefit of the whole Camp during the "Protest" the orders, for new goods wher not permitted to leave Camp, to the buisness firms in Sydney wich usualy had suplied the "orders". Theirfore as no provisions of any sort wher permitted to enter Camp, bar the short "issued" "starving rations" of the Governement C/ Camp gets back slowly into usual channell, bread rations short again, issued 7 ounces sugar to each Internee being told that same wher for 1 week. All other food ration wher issued short. (State account) On this evening 2 Internees made a bolt bit for liberty successfull, allthough the Comandant had thought "If he punishes the whole Camp, this will stop" it has acted the r reverse as several are restless & the first chance will be taken by several to regain their falsely robbed liberty. - (State account. On Sunday March 9th A Internee, on account of his firewood being carted

[Page 25]

into the Camp, as previously to the protest, but same had to be carried in some instances ¼ mile on the Internees shoulders from the Railway depot, this with the asistance of another Internee, carried a pice over 300 in weight. When having carried same about ¾ of the way, one Internee asked to put same down. The bag of wood hardly left his shoulders, when he fell backwards; when the ambulance arived, they found life to be extinct" so remoived the Corpse to the Camp morgue. As the Col. Out of pure spite had taken the wagon from the service but compelled Internees to carry heavy logs, the whole compound holds the Comander responsible for this Mens death. The unfortunate Internee was 71 years of age. On account of undernourishement & certain overexcercion endet his life with a Heart-stroke. in this blackhole of Australia. On this morning another Internee had his foot crushed by one of the logs, while picking up to carry same into Camp. Sunday March 9 also only some Internees received breadration but the majority received non at all, for the following reason, as informed by the Provost Marshall Drommond that becourse the Authorities haiving employed Bakers from Sydney, in prefference to employ German Internees, for 5 Sh per day, but will compel them to return for 7 Sh, the Sydney bakers as ([indecipherable]) law of the Country forbids work on Saturday Nights, they had not been able to bake more during the day to last 2 days. During the Night several Internee, preffered death to continue life in this Camp & made a successfull escape by cutting the wires close the Camp Post office, crawling about 100 yards betwen the wires, thence cutting some more wires

[Page 26]

{Copy of Newspaper cutting}
HIS LAST REST
Death in Holdsworthy Camp
The death of Joseph Maschke, an internee at the Germa nConcentration Camp, Holdsworthy, who fell dead while at work on Sunday last, was investigated by the Liverpool District Coroner. Maschke was suffering from heart disease. He, with other internees, was carrying logs of firewood from the camp sawmill to the compound kitchen, a penalty imposed by the authorities for taking part in the recent camp strike.
The log the two internees were carrying weighed about 2cwt, and the distance from the sawmill to the kitchen was about 500 yards. When about 100 yards fro mtheir destination, Maschke said, "Put it down, we’ll have a rest. " Immediately he fell backwards and died as he was being taken to the camp Hospital.
A finding of death from heart failure was recorded.

[Page 27]

[Continued from page 25]
they climbed a high paling fence & dropped to the ground. None being on the Main street surroundet by Official building with guards stationed every, they used all cunning to wits, as, as soon as noticed a bullet would shurly have been fired at them, they managed to pass all the guards & Senterys unoticed. However the next morning at 7 a. m. a armed search partie wher sent out in the surrounding bush, wich however returned empty handet. During the afternoon the unfortunate internee, who had died while carrying firewood wher burried at in the Liverpool Cemetery March 10/ On this day the bread ration wher issued short to the whole Camp. At about 9 45 p. m. a shot was fired in the western part of the Compound. Upon the writer reaching the gate, seen 2 Interneees being taken out of the Compound by Police, one limping heavily. Knowing the bullet had hit its mark, I remained to watch events. The doctor wher called by telephone from the hospital. About 10 minutis after one Internee wher taken to the lockup, while the other wher carted in the handwaggon of the Camp ambulance to the hospital. The police came into Camp & dispersed the Internees with the words "Move on, no harm done. " As no Internee trusts no soldier guard & everyone eager to leave this Dante Inferno, alive & with healthy bones, they moved insterntly to their barracks to re turn in for the night March XI 11th. Upon making investigation this morning I found out the following true facts of the shooting the Night previously. Two Internees who had been for a walk inside the Barbwire, previously to retiring for the Night on the vermin in fested shelves inside the Barracks, had reached th western part of the Camp, wher all Austrians ar housed. As their is about 10 yards away the washing place No. 2 & hearing

[Page 28]

a water tap running same stopped an instant Knowing to be near the taps being against the rules & so liked to see, who the careless Internee was, who to riskes his life to procure water, first upon stopping & still on the main road of the Camp, the Sentery on the running bridge 20 yards away & about 15 feet high sung out" Wher you’r going" at the same time firing at the Internees inside the Camp, with result that bullet entered his top leg, going right through & striking the hard Metal, splintered in ricotchicted in 7 pices in the air entering the f woodwork of the barrack 4 feet away & embedding theirin. The main part of bullet went through a Huch board of hardwood travelling another 9 feet & embedding itself in the Wood of the barkpart of the barrack, ½ foot below a bunk in wich an Austrian Internee layd, having retired for the night. If the bullet had gone ½ foot higher, she would have penetrated the body of another Internee insocently laying in his bunk. A Internee in this Camp never knows, when a bullet might come his way & shatter all his hopes at a moments notice Why the Soldier fired is a mistery to all of us, as the Internees wher on the main road & a ¼ of a hour before the Bugle call lights out "unless he were dissapointent in not haiving" had the expeckted chance in firing into the Camp wholesale during the strike, he toke the first chance available, when a Internee came close enough for him to make shure of his aim. Good Crack rifle man wher needet mush on the Western front, but this man preffered to remain in the Home-

[Page 29]

[Copy of Newspaper cutting]
Treatment Of Prisoners.
London, Thursday
It is reported from Berlin that the German Government’s commission which investigated the shooting of French prisoners at Mannheim concentration camp after the armistice and the outbreak of typhus in 1914 at Wittenburg camp has decided against Germany in respect of the former matter and favourably to Germany as regards the latter.
A white-washing report has been issued which states that the camp was properly equipped with supplies and that the British doctors’ statements were based on hearsay evidence and misunderstandings. The commission exonerates Dr. Aschenbach, who, it states, supervised the camp correctly until he himself was caught by typhus.

[The following is in handwriting]
11 April 1919

[Page 30]

[Continued from page 28]
deffence force wher he had to guard unarmed Internees, as the Germans on the Western front had rifles & might have provin itself better Cracksman than this Recruit. At 10 am. a enquiry took place, but same wher only "per forma" to satisfy the regulationes in vogue. The Woundet Internee is only a German "while the reputation of the discipline & the regulationes "amongst the Guards" & Officers at the Holdsworthy Camp are at stake. During the day Shop owner, when informed, that orders for foodstuffs would be again transmitted to Firms in Sydney as prevailing previous to the strike. Not many will run the risk now in sending for foodstuffs, wich it takes a week & in some instances even more, before the goods arrive on account of the uncertainty of the duration of our internement, as everybody now looks forward to a speedy release This day to firewood wher carted in per dray & horse to the Kitchens I think the Camp authorites have learned a lesson, that this sort of heavy work would have killed a good many more internees. 12/ During the afternoon a Puplic Meeting wher held in the Austrian Theater for following reasons. The Comandant had issued orders previously for the Internees, to carry in the provission from the depot, including wood & oil. All this articles wher brought to the Camp, per trucks. Without a murmur, this order wher obyed. As it toke however a lot of Guards & much trouble for the Police, he recindet this order & demandet Internees to voluntar for 2 s per day to goe into the Woods to co cut same. Their wher also

[Page 31]

about 20 Internees, who went to work for this rate of wages, though armistice had been signed. To get unity in the Camp, wher the reasons of this meeting, following motions wher carried unanimously That no Internee will volunter for any work outside the Camp unless payd at least Soldierspay (5 s) per day. No. That if any Internee acts against this Motion & accepts work for the old rate of wages, vie (2 s) per day, he shall be kindly asked, for the wellfare of this Camp, to pack his trunks & depart. So this does away with work by Internees, as work prolongs the life of this Camp. & we are all eager for our liberty, wich has now been taken away long anough 13/ Friday 2 Butcher shop & 1 Baker inside the Camp opened their buisnesses & needless to say made a roaring trade being sold out a few hours after opening, being stormed by the hungry internees, as our Camp rations, issued by military are indeet insufficient, & we all had been either on "No Rations" 2 weeks ago, & half rations lately. The breadration is still "short issued" to us. On the 13/5 following Notice issued to the Camp: It is notified for the information of all concerned, that Persons who are released or repatriated from this Camp, will be entittled the free conveyance of 84 lb luggage only exclusive of tools of trade. It is recomendet that all surplous articles be disposed of as early as possible Signed Holman. Comandant. This notice caused excitement in the Camp, as the majority had made articles to take home, articles wich had taken months to finishe, under very difficult labor, on account of the tools, being mostly manufactured in the Camp. No those to be disposed of for a "song" as their was not too much money amongst the Working class Internees, at any time, & the more wealthy ones, had bought all required. Theirfore the following notice wher given to the Camp under the orders of Captain

[Page 32]

Bardsley, the Inteligence officer: Notice: All those Internees who are likely to be returned to their Native Country, & who are affected by the restrictiones imposed on passengers luggage, as well as those, who for other reasons, would like to dispose of some of their belongings in the Compound by a public auction autside, are requested to a Meeting in the Austrian Theater on March 15th at 3. p. m. for the purpose of ellecting an Auction Comittee. The Hall was crowded, but every one declined to send any thing away from the Camp, without the proper sureties wher forthcoming, to receive the money if goods wher sold, or the goods returned. As no one could grant this request & no inmate of this Compound, trusts any one outside, not even with a picture frames, as our sad experience has proven during the past years, that we are the loosers allways , nothing came of this meeting, but every one, lets "the day" come . The Military Officials & Guards also Police have brought articles by the hundrets. during the Past years. Sands the former Comandant had a Artist employed for months to paint pictures, his payment was 2 sh per day, & everything found. Under others their was a doppel picture, The General view of this Camp. The present Officers get suits made by the tailors in Camp. The boot makers make Shoes & boots galore for this sayd Gentleman. Model of Ships & Mashines getting sold to them, also fancy boxces & picture frames, & every thing gets payd at the rate of 1 sh per day. I haive personaly seen, wher a Woodcarver Internee carved a photoframe out of Kauri size 3 feet by 2, wich had taken him 6 weeks working from 8 am untill 6 p. m. recieving [Pound sign] 1. 10 when he delivered same to the Military Police. The present Comandant had several articles made for his personal & family use, under others wher a whole sweep of furniture, made entirely by Internee Cabinet Makers & payd 2 sh per day for their labor. (Metzger) So the public will see, that they were paying for the upkeep of those Camps & certain Individuals In Australia reaped the whole benefit, in employing the Internees skill, & no doubt their was some good

[Page 33]

tradesmen & talent amongst the Internees. On the 17/3 The Comittee informed the Internees generallly of the following: Those during Srtrikeweek distributed Cigars & Cigarettes, are a gift, send to the "Manila Gentleman, of wich are 6 in our Camp to 20 in the Trial Bay Compound, who kindly have given the whole bulk of the gift to our Camp, & for wich the Comittee expresses its thanks, in the Name of the Camp. This parcel contained 12000 Cigarrs & 70000 Cigarettes. Needless to say that this gift wher nun to aprociated , especialy, wher those who distributed, hunger reigned in our midst, so every one had the consolation, to enjoy a good smoke, in spite of the Authorities. On the 17/3 March only 1 loaf of 4 lb 1 bread issud to 10 Internees for following reasones given by our Camp food comptroller, as per Notice: In consequence of leave given to a few Bakers (Civilians) the issue of bread will be ½ ration ther other half, 8 onces will be issued in flour. The rationes due to us previous to the Strike, & those lost during the strike will not be issued to us by the Authorities. On this day each Internee recieved 8 ounces of flour, but 90% of the internees could not use it, as no utensils wher forthcoming to prepare same into an eating articles, & as the only fire available were the Camp Kitchens, wich are open to the General Internees from 2-3 p. m only the reader will see, to what benefit the flour was to the Internees, as the 16 Cooks employed in the Campkitchens, wher unable to prepare the sayd flour into an eating article, on this perticular day & to do their necessary work also. So I admit their wher a good few sacks of flour wasted by the Camp administration, as it wher in most instances of no possible use to the Internees. This day following reply wher recieved from the official visitor: Rev Father Jerger. Sir. Your letter of 7th March re inst is recieved. The spiritos your communication, somewhat suprises me. You do not appear to me, to realise that Prisoners of war haive to conform to the disciplinary order of their captores, wether they think them reasonable or not. I never read a more prosperous suggestion than yours that the Camp Authorities wher goading the Internees to breaking point with murderous intent. I understood

[Page 34]

Will you kindly send enclosed copy to the Department of Deffence. I remain Sir yours faithfully Charles Jerger Chairman of Comittee. To this letter the following were enclosed. "We beg to inform you, that the following rationes were overdue to the Camp up to Febr. 20th (according Foodregulation Sept. 1 1915. 6760 lb of vegetables 1355 lb potatoes 978 lb Coffee 558 lb Cheese. These rationes haive not been given out up till today as the suplys of rationes in general is very irregular giving constant dissatisfaction. (b) We further beg to aske your Honor to ascertain wether we are entitled to proper baking facilities & utensils, if the Governement supplys flour-rationes Signed Ch Jerger Chairman. During the by the Authorities called Strike, the Internees wher withheld as formerly stated all foodrationes. During these days we lost the following foodration Meat 10 ounces per day for 4 days 12500 lb. Bread 1 lb per day for 4 days & half rationes for the following 3 days. 27500 lb. Condensed Milk for 7 days. 1470 lb. Sugar 4312 lb. Cheese 2500 Potatoes 10542 Vegetables 6566 Salt 1092 Pepper 17 Coffeee 237 tea 83 without Oathmeal Peas extra. By reading this, a true account of short provission the Public can judge, that I haive not excagerated, when I say "Hunger" wher King amongst our midst" When the Authorities to to such inhuman steps, to force us with hunger to subdue to their hidden sarcastic purposes. Many a weak Internee would have died, for weakness & hunger, if it had not been for the unity prevailing amongst our midst, to every one who had private foodstuffs, gaive it in allmost every instance voluntary, for the whole Camps benefit.
[The following is a newspaper cutting, on which is written 18/3]
Home Service Holdsworthy Concentration Camp
A number of men are required for Home Service Work, principally guard and sentry duty.
Rates of pay, 5/ per diem, 7 days for work (less 6d per diem deferred until discharge), with food and clothing and medical attendance. In addition, married men receive 2/ per diem for wife, and 6d per diem for each child under the age of 16 years, the maximum separation allowance being limited to 4/ per diem.
Two days leave of absence granted every 14 days.
Preference will be given to Returned Soldiers.
Applicants should report, to the Garrison Sergeant Major, Victoria Barracks, Paddington, at 9. 30 a. m. on Wednesday, 19th March, 1919.
[End of newspaper cutting]

[Page 35]

I Letter to Harvey
GCC Holdsworthy March 18th 1919. To His Honor Mr Justice Harvey, Supreme Court Sydney.
Sir. Your esteemed letter of March 17th to hand. I. That letter was censored in error, so it stated envelope enclosed. II. We haive carefully re-read our letter of the 9th inst & cannot understand how you could see in it any other way attempt, but the most earnest desire, on the part of the Comittee, to preserve goodwill among & towards all. But as we point out on page I sect. IV. pluerly it is not too much to ask, & to expect that wee see & meet with some symphatetic impulse on the part of our captors III. We do not appear to realise that Prisoner of war haive to conform to the disciplinary orders of their captors wether they think them reasonable or not. The Soldiers & Men & Warsmen here alone are true Pris of War. The rest of us "War Precaution Act" notwithstanding are interned Civilians not combatants, unjustly made Prisoners of War & treated not like prisoners of war are treated in every civilised country, but treated worse, than the wilest criminals. A whilst our captores have the power, they have no right, humane or divine, to treat us this way. Their disciplinary orders, though so often unreasonable, howe ever recieved except one, the most excemplary obedience as you conceede. But how unreasonable some orders are, is proved by the recent order to carry wood from a depot, its ready & willing fullfilment being not the cause, but ocassion of the death of an internee. IV. I never read a more preposterous suggestion than ours ectra "Yes, with all due respect, to one who has not lived through the days from Febr. 19th to March 1th. It does sound prepperous preposterous, but to us, who have lived through them, the facts in this face bear to us such construction. V. I understand you & your asociates . . . . no insule ordination in future. We can all assure you their is none. We appeal, we hope & shall do our best that their may be none. And our efforts can easily be secondet by a little goodwill on the part of the Military, instead of being to an extent temper. The Internees have obeyed every order. They fulfil their part. The Colonel as per promisse does not fullfill his. As for troublesome times ahead "for this their is no foundation. This Camp of 5000 Men with some Justice can undoubtly tests of the guards or Policemen

[Page 36]

you & your associates, who met me at the camp at my last visit, to state your assure anc there would be no insubordination in future. It was in view of that statement that I asked the Deffencence Department to exercise clemency towards men, who had been put under arrest. If your letter means that the Internees only intend to obey disciplinary orders when they think fitt, I fear troublous times are ahead for every body. As requested, I have send the copy of your letter of the 9th to the Deffence Departement . Yours faithfully J. M. Harvey. Official Visitor ::1/2 ration cheese when issued, amounting to about 1000 lb weight short. Bread issue is also very irregular 20/ The Comittee called Public Meeting in Austrian Theater to give their report wich were following I) Final report of Comittee II) Resolutiones III) Suggestiones Object of Comittee I) Release of strike prisoners II) Rollcall III) Reprovisioning the Camp IV) Comission of enquirey V) Repatriation. Results. 1) Parkes wher reopened & gardens for the recovery of produce, though sorrow to state, that most of the produce had been gathered by unknown Soldiers during the Strike week, so, their was not much produce to gather. 2) Reopening of shops. 3) Cartage of provission allmost restored (Under promisse) Up till the present only firewood got carted direct to the Kitchens. The foodstuffs however only as far as the Maingate, also the Bread rationes. 4) Rations still irregular & partially issued, but in the main on the mend. 5)Some Pris wher released 6) Rollcall, Comission of Enquiry & repatriation still await settlement 7) Some special cases await settlement 8) The greater gain of greater unity resulted in showing how any further Comittee can gain & retain the confidence of the Camps by (A) working harmoniously together (B) Placing every word & act before the Camp, doing nothing behind the Camps back. (C) Keeping before the mind, that a Comittee is the mouth piece & not the master much less the ruler of the Camp. (D) Any man that seeks to be master or Ruler of the Camp, is in a false position – he will do things in the dark – he is utterly

[Page 37]

unfitt for any position of responsibility. Resolution passed unanimously That this German Concentration Camp, Main Compound, expresses its deep & lasting horror: (1) at our unjust imprisonment (2) at our cruel & savage treatement (3) at our being Keept long after prisoners have been released in every other country 4) at the daily deluge of lies poured with devilish malice & intend on Germany & the German People 5) That our Government make our solemn protest to every civilised country & demand satisfaction from the League of Nationes. That the Camp is permitted to see, that Canteen funds & every other fund is openly administered & justly distributed. That the Camp attend to many matters & questions springing up & around & about the closing of the Camp. That the Camp earnestly consider wether a Comittee in the near future be a necessity or an advantage. The Comittee. During the Night from 20 – 21 2 Internees in the Singh Singh Compound managed their mysterious escape. They were found missing the next morning. As no wires had been tampered with nor any hole or tunnel could be found the Police wher at their wits ends to know, how they got out. The Provost Marshall asked an Internee "Now that they are gone, you might as well tell us, how they got out, & wher they intend to go to. " To this he received the prompt answer . One We put into the Stewpot, & the other we send to the Peace Conference. " As the Police wher unable to find out how they had managed their escape, & to prevent another occurrence 7 Police wher stationed inside the Singh Singh Compound during the Nights in conjunction with the usual guards. 21/ About 4 lb of flour wher issued to each Mess (10 Persons) (State Gindals account of Paper) We haive allways been cheated since the comencement of this Camp, be it in our food rationes, Parcels, Money matters & Cashe direct

[Page 38]

I haive given allready several instances previously in my Book. It is common Knowledge of this Camp, that Officers in charge of the canteen funds haive robbed this Camp of the Summe of over & pound;3000 up till October 1916. 23/ During the evening 2 Internees wher discovered by the Police, to be between the Barbwires, trying to escape, they wher arrested in send to Darlinghurst Jail for a "change " & to break the monotoney. 24/ A few Internees returned from Darlinghurst Jail, wher they had been confined, as a result of the previous strike. They all gave a horible account of treatment recieved, while their. The Post office wher closed for 7 days, because the Military Officials employed therein had all been on four lough, & on their return wher put into Quarantine for 7 days as per regulationes So no letters could be distributed to internees, though only a person who has been in similar circumstances can imagine, what pleassure a letter from the outside world means. 26/ All Soldiers who had been in Quarantine, wher permitted to enter their Barraks & remain their, so the Quarantine wher only a farce, as this Soldiers wher stationed the next day on Guard duty. This day the Camp recieved the following Notice of the Department for Deffence. Melbourne March 19th 1919. With refference to your communication of the 16 inst adressed to the Minister for Deffence & forwardet through the Official Visitor requesting that a Commission of enquiry be apointed to investigate the recent happenings of the German Concentration Camp, I am directed to inform you thet the Department is in full possession of the facts concerning the disorder and it is not proposed to apoint any as you sugest. Signed Trumble Secretary. 28/ Several Internees wher arrested during the Night becourse, unable to sleep inside of the Vermin-infested Barracks, strolled about in the middle of the Camp after "Lights out" so the Military Police arested them & charged them for trying to escape, & locked some up in the Lockeys. 27/ "Ginger " the well known Camp lunatic, wich wher mad

[Page 39]

though harmless, wher returned from Darlinghurst Jail, wher he had been sent by the Authorities for unknown reasons for 14 days. 29/ Following Notice issued to Camp. Copy of Cablee. London March 14th 1919. To Swedish Consul General Sydney. Acording instructiones received from Viena, please make payments only to German Austrians from date of reciept of this telegram and refuse subventions to all subjects of other states formed in territory of former Austria Hungaria, advising them that this refusal is a consequence of the omittance of these other states to furnish money for the purporse stop as German Austrians are to be considered Austro of German Nationality, who have their legal domicile (heimatsrecht) in Ober or Nieder Osterreich, Steiermark, Salzburg,Kaeruter, Deutchbohmen Ludentenlander & Tyrol with the exemption of Grentino Signed Swedish Charge D. Affairs. 30 During the afternoon 2 Internees wher discovered by the Police, laying in a dry Waterhole in the centre of the Internees Vegetable garden, & covered with bags & rubbish. As they intended to escape, they wher arrested. About 100 yards from this hohle are 6 big Galvanised Water tanks 2 Internees managed to elude the Sentry ,strike>so laying and getting through the Barbwire unseen found herein a good hiding place. While the former 2 Internees wher arrested they watched the Police from their hiding place & remained untill it was dark, when they managed their escape successfully. 31/ This morning 12 Internees wher taken out of the Lockeys under a heavy guard & all handcuffed two & two had to march under the escort of six armed Sentrys & 1 Lighthorseguard to the Liver pool Railway Station 4 miles distant, to be taken to Darlinghurst Jail, wher they had been sentenced to confinement for trying to escape. This day the Sydney Newspaper had an article in the Paper stating the treatment recieved by a Officer in a German Concentration Camp. Why does Australia

[Page 40]

German Concentration Camps Holdsworthy March 28th 1918
The Honorable The Acting Minister of Deffence. Melbourne.
Sir. As we haive not yet heard about our request regarding (I) Rollcall (II) Permission to cable to Swiss Legation London Re Consul, Kindly let us Know your decision. In Memo 3 863 you state:: The Departement is in full possession of the facts concerning the disorder . . . that is the recent strike. This is a step in the right direction. But mere Knowledge that the savagery of 1) Depriving Men of Bread meat & Water. 2) Of thus goading unarmed Men to breaking point with view to Bloodshed. "is of no use unless the Department deals with those guilty & prevents such violation in the future. Five tousend Men are absolutely convinced that the facts, about wich Mr Justice Harvey states "Their does not seem to be any serious disputes", carry on their face the deliberate intent to murder. Surely you do not condone much less aprove of such murderous intend? Do you think that this facts bear any other construction? In the minds & hearts of & memories of 5000 Men these facts will never bear any other interpretation. In the minds & hearts & memories of 10 million German People, these facts can never bear any other meaning. Thereof the mere admission that you know these facts is, to say the least rather inefficacious. Awaiting your reply I remain Yours faithfully Charles Jerger. Chairman

[Page 41]

[Continued from page 39]
Letter to Harvey Protest of old Internees
25/3 19 To the Official Visitor. Re internees over 45 years of age, who by agreement with Great Britain wher to be repatriated over 2 years ago. I wishe to bring under your notice the following: In this Camp are some hunderts of men above that age, suposed to have gone from these shores over 2 years ago. Day in day out we hear & read about liberty, humanity, civilication, christianity, solemn treaty-obligations ectra. All this nauceating prattle seems to be intendet to catch the unwary & the fools. Here in this Camp are hunderts of men, who haive done no wrong but for accident of birth being incarcerated, very many for over 4 years, & who by solemn treaty were to be sett at liberty over 2 years ago, still have to endure the indignities & degredation worse than criminals. Even those Australians captured by the German auxcilary cruiser "Wolf" have returned to Australia still We are hier. Shurly if the Australian Government knows something of the truth "wanted fair play" it would have found & will find new ways & means get us away, We who are only too glad to shake the dust of this country from our shoes. I trust your Honor will bring this matter to the notice of the authorities again we sincerely hope speedily to see the last of this inferno. Yours respectfully Serpenthat 5 Co. 2 Messe.

[Page 42]

Complain. Do they treat their Prisoners any better (State account) As the life within this Camp wher allmost unbearable, a good few Internees preffered death than to remain inside the Barbwires. So 3 Internees cut the Barbwire surrounding the Cowpark at 3 p. m this afternoon & made a bolt dash across the open fields to reach the bush at the Bakground of this Camp. The first 1 got through the wires suxcessfully, but the third second got entangled. The lighthorse Sentry on seeing 1 Internee running fired 2 shots, but both lurkily missed. theirupon he covered the one who got entangled with his Rifle untill the Police arived, wich arrested him & placed him in the Lockeys charged with trying to desert & no doubt he will be sent to Darlinghurst Jail. About 12 lighthorse Guards & 15 foot Soldiers went in full pursuit about 3 minutes after the Internee got through the Wire, so his chance to get very far wher remote. About ½ hour after 2 lighthorse Guards & one Police Sergeant wher seen to lead him back towards our Camp. Every Internee pittied this Internee on his stiff luck, so he wher taken to the lockup Police Station & charged theirupon placed in the lockup. While this proceedings wher going on & the Guard looked in the direction wher the Pris wher taken back another young Internee climbed over the 3 rows of wire fence, crawled upon his hands & knees for about 30 yards & climbed up between the six galvanised Frontanks wich stood upon a wooden structure about 7 feet high, their between he remained unbeknown to the guard & awaited darkness, as he only need to negotiate 2 more single barbwires to make his escape compled. Becourse n Internee wich had asisted the 2 Internees, who suxcesfully escaped yesterday, as previously stated, wher taken out of the Main Compound & placed in Singh Singh. 1 April. The Headbuildings of the Military

[Page 43]

administration buildings of this Camp wher beflagged. During the morning "Parade" the Soldiers Paradet before all Alliedflag. This wher done in Honor of some High-Officials ariving today, wich put in their apearance at 12. 30 p. m. Under these arivals wher the State comandant, State Goveners, & some other Military Officials also Consuls of the Allies, (State acount) The sayd Officials never entered the Internement Camp but departed again at 4 p. m. As it wher discovered this morning that several wher missing on Parade, same having escaped during the previous night, the Internees who owned Vegetablegardens, adjoining the football ground, had issued notice, to take all their belongings into the Camp, as same would be broken up. The Military Officials falsely suspekted, the gardens, to be the means of their susecesfull escape. In fact, they enlighten the taske to escape, as the escaping Internee need those to negotiate 2 Barbwires else, & every Barbwire fence, is indeet a big obstacle. About 5 p. m. A light horse guard while patrolling the outside fence noticed a Internee getting over the 3 row inside fence. He reported instantly with result, of the whole Military Police rushed to the spot, in congunction the whole Guard recieved "alarm" & all fell in at their posts. Amongst the Soldiers wher some funny sides, as several had been in their bunks enjoying their afternoon sleep, wich had been rudely disturbed. At the Spot wher the Internee had been detected, wher a Soldierguard stationed during day & night, who had a beat of about 100 yards. This guard wher dumbfoundet when he noticed the Police rushing over to him, as he had noticed nothing unusual. He wher indeet suprised when he seen that a Policeman covered a Internee wich still stood amongst the second to third row of Wires. The Internee of course put up his hands when told to do so & Surrendered. They searched the space outside the Wires & found 5 more internees singly laying between the former mentioned Water tanks outside the. So they also wher arrested & led

[Page 44]

[Newspaper clipping]
Consuls At Holdsworthy Liverpool, Tuesday.
At the invitation of Colonel Holman, commandant, the representative of the AllIed Consuls visited Holdsworthy this morning. The visitors represented America, France, Japan and Belgium.
The precise object of the visit is not known.

Theft from Medical School
A double-nosed Leitz microscope has been stolen from a laboratory at the Medical School of Sydney University.

[Page 45]

[Continued from page 43]
to the lockup. Of course a lot Internees watched the proceedings, haiving nothing else to do & followed the Internees while they wher escorted to the Police Station on the outside of the fence. The Internees all eager to see the process, remained inside the frontgate, as from their was the best view. A Police came to disperse the Internee, wich slowly withdraw, but when this Soldier gused the Words "Get bark you German Bastards" one Internee resented this & lifted his hand as to strike. He wher instantly arrested by the other Police wich formed the cordon to keep the Internees back & led him off to the lockup under the charge of using the expression "Bastard" to a Soldier. Although their wher hundreds to prove "that this charge wher a foundet one, & the expression used by the Soldier it was of no avail, the Internee wher ordered by the Inteligence Officer Capt Bardsly to be taken into the Lockup. During the evening the 2 Internees who escaped the night previously, wher recaptured & under heavy armed guard escorted back in to the Lockup, pending transference to the wellknown Darlinghurst Jail. During the afternoon the Alsace Loraine Internees, got called before the French Consul who wher amongst the VIsitores. 16 wher called but only 9 went to see him. This Gentleman, asked under other questiones. When you will be liberated, at the end of the War, want you be glad to see Alsace French again so you can be a good Frenchman. One Internee (Phillipi) answered him, "I prefer to be a live dead German, to living Frenchman, Alsace is & allways will remain German, the papers hier, only print lies, that the people preffer to be french instead if Germans. " The Consul no doubt wher sorry upon hearing this answer, wher sorry he ever asked such a foolish question, to incite a Man to deny his birth right, especially after the Internee had been behind the wires, for a period extending of over years, & has had a very bitter experience indeet, of the much boonced alliance, fair

[Page 46]

[Newspaper clipping]
Wednesday, April, 16,
Holdsworthy Internees And Betting
Camp Sergeant Promptly Acquitted
No. 1535, Lance-Sergeant A. Knight, of the Concentration Camp Guard Holdsworthy, appeared before a Court-Martial at Victoria Barracks yesterday, charged with conduct to the prejudice of good order and military discipline. In that he did, at Holdsworthy, on or about January 25 last, receive certain sums of money from a prisoner of war for the purpose of betting on horse races. Accused pleaded not guilty.
Major Bowie Wilson acted as prosecutor.
Wilhelm Ritts, a civilian internee in Holdsworthy Camp, said that on January 25 he asked accused to put & pound;1 6s on several horses for him, at the same time giving him written instructions. When he saw accused later he said that the bets were on, and that the horses had nearly all won. Accused asked him what he was to get out of the transaction, and after interviewing an internee named Schultze it was agreed that he should get 2s in the & pound;. Accused told witness that the bookmaker had gone "broke," and paid him & pound;6 in three sums of & pound ;2 each at intervals. He said that he would get the balance of the money (about & pound;50 being involved) as quickly as possible.
In answer to accused, Ritts admitted to having taken a tin of tomatoes from the garden without permission. He was in charge of the garden at the Camp.
You say that the names of the horses were on a piece of paper I want you to tell me the names of the horses – I cannot remember their names.
Did you expect that I was a bookmaker? – No; you only told me that the bookmaker was "broke. "
Sergeant John Thirling, a sergeant of the G. M. P. at Holdsworthy, who interviewed the accused about the alleged bets, in cross-examination said that all the admission the accused made to him was the "bookie" had gone "broke. "
Accused, giving evidence, said that on January 25, Gardener Ritts came to him with some money and a slip of paper, and asked him to "put some money on with the ‘bookies’. " Witness replied, "have you any good tips this time?" Ritts replied, "These are all good," and added, "If you put the money on I will give you 2s in the & pound; on the winnings. " Witness answered, "No, Bill, I cannot do it, because it is more than my military position is worth. I will not risk it. " Ritts said he would take the money back and see if he could get it on in the compound. In the evening, when Ritts came in for tea, witness said, "I see that the horses have won; had you anything on?" and he said no. A few days afterwards witness had occasion to follow Ritts up on the parade ground, when he charged him with taking tomatoes without permission, and told him that he must not take anything more out of the ground.
Cross-examined, witness said that when Thurling asked him about the bets he took it as a joke, and said the "the bookies" had gone "broke. " Schultze had asked him before to put money on, but he refused. He had never put money on the horses at the camp. Racing news went round the camp quick and lively.
Private Percy Mackay a member of the staff of the sergeants’ mess at Holdsworthy for ten months) and Private Charles Henry Pington (who had been connected with the mess staff) said that accused had given them strict instructions not to have any dealings with the internees in any shape or form. Pington added that he had heard Knight refuse to make bets for other people.
Accused, addressing the Court, said that the charge was a mere fabrication, due to the fact that he would not allow vegetables to be taken out of the garden. He had a wife and seven children, and they were of more consideration to him than the few paltry shillings he might get out of any bets made for the internees. It was not likely that on the eve of the breaking-up of the camp he was going to sully a clean military record.
The Court, after a few minutes’ deliberation, found accused not guilty, and ordered his release.

[Newspaper clipping]
Internee’s Ruse

[Note in handwriting – Paper lie 31/3 09. ]
Fails to Secure Escape
Holdsworthy Episode

A further attempt to escape from the German internees camp at Holdsworthy was made yesterday.
While a sentry was crossing one of the compounds, he felt his foot sink into a hole, and a scream of anguish arose from the earth.
Investigation showed that one of the internees had made a shallow hole and, lying down, had covered himself with the soil, having only his nose above the surface.
The man evidently intended to remain in the "grave" until dark, and then to escape by cutting the wire enclosing the compound.
It was subsequently discovered that eight of the internees had packed up their belongings, and that all had evidently intended to escape last evening.
They were taken to Darlinghurst Gaol.

[Newspaper cutting]
German Internees
[Note in handwriting – 23/4]
Repatriation Arrnagements
Melbourne, Thursday – In connection with the Peace Conference, the Cabinet to-day dealt with important cablegrams from the Prime Minister, the nature of which was not disclosed.
Arrangements have now been completed between the British and Australian Governments for the repatriation of certain classes of internees now in the Commonwealth. The Admiralty has released certain ships for the return of these men to Germany.
The State Governments are being asked to make available the services of about eight police magistrates to investigate all cases where appeals are made against repatriation, and the Acting-Prime Minister stated to-night that these cases would be listed for consideration as soon as the services of the magistrates could be obtained.
The first quota of enemy subjects for repatriation will probably leave Australia about the end of May, and will consist of people who were not formerly resident in Australia, such as sailors.
Cabinet to-night had before it the report of a special committee appointed to deal with applications for the release of internees, and with the question of deportation generally.

[Newspaper clipping]
Monday, April 14, 1919
A Golden Chance For Senator Millen

Added knowledge will hurt no one. The more you have the more you get. In the words of David Harold, "Them as has gets. " For this reason, we hasten to present Senator Millen, Minister for Repatriation, with an idea. He can do with a few more, despite the number which he has already received, and though it is doubtless very pleasant to plan the erection of a palatial building in St. Kilda-road, Melbourne, to house the Minister and his ever-growing staff, there are other plans which should have precedence of this scheme, necessary as it may be to Ministerial comfort.
Within 30 miles of Sydney there is a perfect site for an intense culture soldiers’ settlement. Since the war it has been the luxurious dwelling-place of Germans who could not be trusted abroad in their adopted country. At first they were permitted to laze life away, and enjoy a sybaritic existence, but this killing of time palled both upon them and the Federal authorities, and proposals were outlined for the construction of suitable buildings, and the creation of a modern township.
To-day there is not in New South Wales a more pleasant country town than the so called Holdsworthy Camp. It has every convenience and comfort that science can marshal for the physical and social well-being of law-abiding citizens. There are pioneer hamlets outback where splendid husbandmen have not a tithe of the privileges heaped upon the inmates of this camp. Whose lot, if it were generally known, would make half the world envious, and the other moiety angry. Unlike the Australians who were interned in Germany, these disloyal aliens have been treated like honoured guests. And those of their number who have labored have been well paid for their work.
They have not been paid at full union rates, but they have received a goodly recompense for their gentlemanly exertions, and the result is that the camp is almost ideally fated to become the permanent residence of three or four hundred repatriated soldiers. Possibly, the whole place has not cost more than a hundred thousand pounds to construct, whereas its value, at open market rates, would be neared five times that amount.
To convenience these German internees, a special railway line was looped from Liverpool. It cost somewhere about & pound;30,000, and presumably the authorities do not intend to leave it to rust, or tear it up when the enemy allies are released or removed elsewhere. Liverpool camp itself is another particularly good area for repatriation purposes. It is mere waste to retain the camp for military use when there are no troops to occupy it. Senator Millen may be invited to study it, too; but at the moment we are more concerned with Holdsworthy.
Here is a township already ready for occupation; here is quick transit to the city markets; here are all the potentialities – climate, soil, and labor – for a successful soldiers’ settlement. And what is more to the point, here are the artisans who could be employed in preparing it for the fighting men. While the internees are still under confinement, their brains and their muscles could be directed to fitting the land and the town for the accommodation of the gallant men who are entitled to the best that the country can give them.
Money which has been expended on the upkeep of Germans could be turned to profitable and patriotic account. Land which has yielded generously when little more than tickled could be developed. Industries still in their infancy could be expanded into national assets. What could be happier and more just than that Diggers who suffered in German prisons should be provided with a new start in life by the exertions of the Germans who acclaimed the frightfulness of the Fatherland? Senator Millen, what about it?

The Conjurer Again
The Premier is entitled to public gratitude for his memorandum on the meat question. There has been colossal waste of money on the abattoirs. But, says Mr Holman, "no one Government" is to blame. The burden of responsibility is neatly shifted. It is the very latest trick in political legerdemain. Where several offend, none goes wrong. The elector may be advised to paste this precious dictum in his hat for future reference.

Death from influenza or any other cause can be provided for by an A. M. P. Policy. Rates on request from Repv. A. M. Lowenthal 35 Hunter-street.

A woman who asked for a summons against her husband was told by a magistrate at Tottenham (Eng) to wait till her husband assaulted her again

[Page 47]

[The following is continued from page 45]
play & justice. Becourse several lnternees had [indecipherable] escaped, the Comandant punished the whole Camp, by taking away the films, wich the Austrian Theater had generously offered, to be shown on the Camp Screen for the whole Camps-benefit, free free of charge, becourse the Internee syndicate, could not show the programe in the Hall, on acount of being without Gas. During the Night the whole guard patrolling the fence wher "doppelt" on the spot wher they had escaped most suxcessfully & allways had been guardet by one Sentery wher guardet during the Night by three Sentries (State lying account of daily regarding the escape. ) 3/ The usual free Pictures payd for out of the Canteen funds, wher prohibited from being shown, though the films arived as usual. But under orders of a Officer they wher send to the Canteen & not to the Camp. Reasons for this punishement is unknown 6/ Also no free open air Pictures 7/ No Pictures. We Internees had to pay for the films out of Canteen funds, still they arived only as far as the gate & wher returned by the Officer. 10/ During this afternoon about 4 pm. a Aeroplane went over our Camp in the direction towards Sydney. This plane had come from Melbourne 600 miles distant, wich it left 6 days ago. 11/ This day about 100 Internees mostly naturaliced wher called to the Inteligence Office & asked the No. of Naturalication Certificate if married & how many Children also adresse & ordered back to Camp. No Pictures During this week Niemeyer junior & Father Jerger returned to Camp. These Internees had been granted permission to proceed to Brisbane & Sydney respekively Niemeyer to visit his sick father, wich had been released out of this Camp six months ago & Father Jerger to visit his sick brother. Also in this treatement, as well as Camps, it is shown that Australia has 2 classes of Internees. One the wealthy or ‘capitalist, the other the poorer or the

[Page 48]

working Class, and the Regulations though [next few words are covered by portion of newspaper clipping, which is printed upside down and not reproduced here as it is not relevant] one Class, but more severe for the other. As stated previously if a member of a working Man Internee lays dying, permission to hurry home before it is too late, gets refused. Even in case of death, permission has been refused to be permitted to be present at the funeral. However when the more wealthy Internees, wishe to make a trip into the outside world, they only need to aske under some business pretext, or get some one to write, that their is sickness in the family, & the necessary permission is forthcoming. This should never be granted tolerated, as we all are Internees, & behind Wires should be no class destinctiones. But this is the way of the world. The toiler who keeps the wheels of the world industry going gets trodden on, with the heel of the Capitalistic boot, while the "drones" or the Capitalists has everything in his favor. Be it in Jail or Internement Camp 12/ Austrian Film Theater shown their films at the open Camp Cino for the benefit of the Camp, as the Authorities had forbidden, the usual Camp films to enter Camp. 13/ The Authorities send the Camp films wich had arived the day previously into Camp to be shown at the open Camp Kino. So the withholding of the films for 2 weeks by the Authorities & punishing the whole Camp, wher at an end & we will get the free open Picture wich matterialy assist to break the [indecipherable]again. Why the Camp has been punished in this fashion, no inmate of these Camps knows. 14/ 6 Strike Prisoners returned home from Darlinghurst Jail & their faces showed that they had a bad time while their. A Internee informs me that he had informed all about our treatement leading up to the recent

[Page 49]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 22/4]
Der Holdsvorthich Himmel
"The German internees in Australia have been reposing in the lap of luxury, . . . There were butchers’ shops, fruit shops nine cafes and restaurants. There were numerous athletic and social clubs, dramatic chess clubs, two choral societies, several theatres, and an open-air picture show. "
Und how you vos put in der day,
And how you vos amuse,
Vhen out you vos bei Bot’ny Bay
In yoal, pecause you disobey,
Und spracht dose Deutschtum views?
Ach, not so bad it vos, by Gee,
Und not so bad at all,
Far besser als in Germany You been in, Berlin bei der Spree
Vhen Kaiser Bill vos call.

Weies brot, und blenty fleish zu eat,
Und no hard vorks zu do!
Ach, ja! It vos ein lofely dreat
Dot surelich neffer can be beat,
I bet zwel mark mit you.
But efenin’s, dey vos pooty dull?
Ach, nein, Fritz, you vos wrong,
Die nachts mit harmony vos full,
Und barties meet to hate Yohn Bull,
Mit speech, und yoke, und song.

Und did die guards der fist und boot
Und rifle-butt display,
Like in our brison-kampfs so goot?
Of course, dey somedimes shtab und shoot
In Deutschland’s downright vay?
Nein, neffer vonce, dey lofed uns wohl
On far Owsdralia’s shore
Dey dreated uns,lieb’ Fritz, top-hole;
Now Germany ist oop der pole,
Weh! Ve must vork some more. .

Gott! Hans, you don’t not mean to say
Dot you brefers to be
Shut in dot Holdsvorthick avay,
Vhere all you do ist eat and blay
Und schlep? Py Chiminy!
Dot’s vhere you’re allzugedder wrong
Dot’s yoost der bloke I am,
Fur Berlin, where die shtarves belong
Vhile Holdsvorthick ist going strong
I do not care ein dam.

[Page 50]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 27/11. 1917. ]
Sydney Brewer Interned

Mr. Edmund Resch.

A warrant authorising the internment of Mr. Edmund Resch, founder and head of the well-known firm of brewers – Resch’s, Ltd. , of Dowling-street, Redfern – was executed by military officers from Victoria Barracks yesterday. Mr. Resch returned to his home, Swifts, Darling Point, after visiting the brewery in the morning, and, after taking his lunch, he accompanied the officers to the German internment camp at Holdsworthy, the journey being accomplished in his own automobile, driven by his son.
When questioned yesterday the Minister for the Navy, Mr. Joseph Cook, stated that no change had been decided upon by the Cabinet in regard to its policy concerning the internment of persons of enemy origin who were still at liberty.
The State Commandant, Brigadier-General Lee, who was also questioned, denied that he had been in consultation with the Prime Minister on the subject of internments. He was not aware that a list of persons who were about to be interned had been drawn up.
Mr. Resch, who is 71 years of age, has occupied a prominent place in commercial circles in Sydney for many years. Mr. Resch, jun. , informed a representative of the "Herald" yesterday that his father was born in Westphalia, and left Germany, at the age of 16 years, evading the military service required by law. He came to Australia, and for some years was engaged in gold-digging in Victoria, after which he opened a business as a manufacturer of aerated waters at Wilcannia. In 1895 he came to Sydney, where he established the firm of which he is still head. He acquired Alit’s brewery, and later the plant and business of the New South Wales Lager Beer Company. According to his son, Mr. Resch has been in bad health for the past eight or ten years, during which time he had not actively associated himself with the business, which had been conducted by his two sons, Messrs. Edmund and Arnold Resch, both of whom were educated at the Church of England Grammar School, North Sydney, and at Scots College, Melbourne, and who resided with him at Darling Point. In 1913, while passing through the Red Sea on his return from a visit to Germany for the benefit of his health, said Mr. Resch, jun. , his father suffered an injury to his eyes, as a result of which he lost the sight of one, and only retained the partial use of the other. In Sydney he was advised by the doctors to return to Europe for treatment, and he went to a hospital in Germany, where he was when the war broke out. It was only with difficulty that he was able to leave Germany, where he was threatened with internment, and he immediately returned to Australia. Mr. Resch, jun. , added that he would like it to be known that his father had subscribed several thousands of pounds to the war loans, and in addition had contributed, in conjunction with the firm, over & pound; 3000 to patriotic funds. As well as this, they had done all in their power to promote recruiting amongst their employees, and were now paying the difference between the military pay and the previous salaries of over sixty of their men who were at the front.

[Page 51]

[Handwritten notes at top of newspaper cutting –
State excitement in Camp, anounced at pictures 3 cheers viene of early release, nothing else but heard about release, till midnight while in sheds. Next morning also excitement & token about release. ]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten notes at side as follows –
Newscuttings -Huns to Go -Der Holdsurvthick Himmel -Sydney Brewer Interned]

The Sun, Tuesday, April 15, 1919.
Huns To Go
4000 Aliens to be Packed Off
Commonwealth Takes Action
Ships Now On The Way
Melbourne, Tuesday.
It is understood that vessels for the deportation of 4000 Germans, Bulgarians, and Turks from Australia and 300 enemy aliens from New Zealand have been arranged for by the Commonwealth Government.
Two of the vessels to be employed will leave Italy shortly, and several are now on their way from Great Britain, carrying troops on board. Among these is the Wyreema.
The departure of the aliens from Australia should take place in about eight weeks time.


[Page 52]
[Continued from page 48]
riot to Mr Yates the Federal labor Member wich had been sentenced to detention by Courtmartiall for supposing to cause mutiny on board of a Transport while at Port Adelaide. This gentleman had promised to bring his complaints personally before the proper authority when liberated. As this gentleman has been liberated I await to see material deeds of his promises. During this afternoon , a internee dressed himself in a artificial Soldiers uniform with a shovel over his soldiers he proceeded to the main gate. The soldier sentry stationed their taking him for a real Australian. Soldierguard opened the gate & let him pass. The Internee wendet his way pass the hospital into the bush & liberty. 15)This morning while on parade the Soldier Company Comander of Cop 72 found out that this Internee was missing. Having all night start & everybody in the City & town having to wear compulsory masks on account of the flu epidemic, he ought to manage to remain at liberty a long time. However good luck to him. The censorship is indeet getting stricter daily in regards of Internees correspondence with the outside world. Last week, I had a letter returned on 3 different occasion, wich I had rewritten to my wife & family 3 times marked Contains offensive statements. " A Internee is at a loss to know what to write as truthfull statements are in all instances, offensive or prohibited matter.
15)This day following acount in newspaper re our repatriationes (state account)This caused immense joy amongst all of us, as now we know that the world remembered that their wher over 5000 Civilian Internees in Australia still behind wires though armistic had been agreed upon by all Nations at war over 5 months ago. The Internees wher already

[Page 53]

counting the day & amp; month, when they would arive in Germany, as 3800 Internees out of 4500 in this camp, had demandet their repatriations, & so shake off the dust of Australian soil. So I don't think it right for a Government to express itself in the name of deporting. I know several instances wher the father of the family, wich had residet in Australia over 1/4 of a century, wich wives wher Australian & all Children born in Australia, wher that disgusted with the Government of Australia, that they also demandet their repatriation. In one instance I knew of a father and son, the later having served in the Australian Navy is still being a Naval reserve of Australia, but having been detained behind wire for a considerable time, the both have volunteered for repatriation to Germany, also the whole family of 5 other allmost grown up sons & daughters (Annowsky of Hobart) Their is another Internee a Farmer by occupation of South Australia, who is 56 years of age his father being born in Australia of German parents. This farmer had 3 sons two of wich enlisted & went over seas to do their bit, the remaining one being only 17 years of age, showed willingness to follow the lead of his brothers. The father refused to give his consent as he was not willing to let the only son remaining at home go & him to run the farm at his old age. He wher arrested & interned. He made several applications for his release, but wher informed by the official visitor Justice Harvey, wich had caused enquiries being made in this Internees wrongful detention, that the Assistant Secretary for Minister of Deffence Trimble, that as he had shewn to

[Page 54]

(Parker)
be anti Australian he would have to remain interned. Their is another father & son, the latter being third generation, interned also under the Charge of being anti Australian becourse the son refused to enlist & are still in this camp. If the Government could hear these Australians conversing, about administration of Justice fair play, this Government need not deport them becourse they demand to be returned to Germany. 16/ Paul Wilms, who had been arested during the strike wher before Curt marshial (state acount) amongst the better class their was a lot of betting going on, on the diverse Racing Club meetings. This Camp boasted of 4 Bookies, who stood openly on the day of any race & shouted the "odds" finding many backers. No difference from an Australian Race Couse. As the odds were however Camp made acording to the Bookies books & differet from the prices outside many prisoners, send Bets outside with Soldiers. The later always receiving Comission. However on many ocasions the Internees never recieved any money, if the horses had won as the Soldier had of used the money for his own purposes If the Internee complained to the Camp authorities, the Soldier wher called before Curt marshial & allways the usual verdict wher found. "Case dismissed" State German Internees complain" & Holdsworthy Internees & Betting" This day came to my notice the illtreatment of a Internee while in the lockup. On the day when 6 wher caught laying between the tanks trying to escape, a looker on inside the Compound wher arested, becourse he did not move

[Page 55]

on when told to do so by the Military Police. Under the Charge of using obscence language he wher put into the lockup. When in the big Cell, the former Provost Marshall Bardsly in company of several Police entered, picked him out & ordered this Intenee to be remoived into a isolation cell, & teached bad language. He had hardly entered the Cell when four Military Police sett upon him & handled him roughly using their fists & Boots on this unfortunate Internee untill he couldn’t move The calling for mercy & asistance wher heard by all the other inmates of the lockup, wich however wher helpless. They dealt it out to him untill he wher senseless, they left him laying on the bar ground & locked the door & went away. The next morning he wher returned into the big cell, shewing marks all over his body. This information I have of the illtreated Internee himself also 5 Internees who wher in other Cells at the time.

17/ This day we wher notified to change paliasses & worn out blankets. this however proved a farce, as we wher refused to recieve anything, as nothing wher in the store. Some Internees wher lucky to recieve some hessian bags – wich they could sew into a Palias. I asked for an exchange of 2 blankets, however wher informed by the Soldier in the store, that their wher none their. When I explained to him that as the nights wher very cold this blankets being allmost tread bare & full of holes on account of 4 years constant use, they wher insufficient to keep me warm. The Soldier pitied me & advised me, to pinch one of my fellow Internees

[Page 56]

This wher poor advise indeet. As no straw has been issued to us yet, I am sleeping on the bar wire, some of my clothing spread over it, to keep the draft away, as the nights wher indeet very cold. No fires being allowed in or near the barracks. The whole Camp boasted of one fireplace, wich however wher useless as the Camp wher not issued with firewood. So it wher without fire. The only fires being in the 3 Kitchens & the entrances wher prohibeted, with the exception of 1 hour during the afternoons. This day the Newspaper contained the following account, wich destroyed some of our hopes of an early release (state acount) still we live in hopes.
18/ This being "Good Friday. " A holiday outside but hier like any other day. During last night those 6 who had tried to escape & wher found between the tanks returned to Camp from Darlinghurst Jail. Amongst these wher a Internee who on account of debt did not like to enter the Main compound, but demandet internement in one of the other Camps. As he resisted to enter the Main camp, he wher escorted by 5 Police into the lockup. This morning 8 45 a. m. he wher brought out to be tried by Major Hollborrow. the Camp Comandant. While standing in the open outside the police Station, & in the presence of about 100 Internees wich stood inside the Wires close to the Maingate 5 Police sett upon him & this Internee got a very rough handling indeet. I seen myself the Internee being hit 2 hits over the head with a loadet batton, wich the Police Station

[Page 57]

boasts of to have galore of, my "anger" nickname for this Police when the Internee wher laying on the ground I also saw "Tiny" the Police Sergeant & Chessie the Warrant officer put their boots into the senseless Internee. When the police reckoned they had dealt it out enough, four of them picked him up & carried him senseless back to the lockup. This all happened before the opening of the Court. About ¼ of an hour later Hollborrow the Camp Comandant appeared, but as their wher no Cases to be tried, he returned to his Private office. During the evening hours about 10 p. m. we heard a shot coming from the direction of Singh Singh the bullet whistling over the Main Compound. The reason of the necessity of this shot I am unable to state. The issue of provission is very irregular. Cheese is due to us now over 2 weeks ago, also potatoes.
20/ This day being Easter Sunday a holiday, but like any other day inside this Camp. This morning a mess in the 3 Company had bread issued to them, in one loofe wher found a mouse nest containing 4 young mice. The Internees toke it of the Camp Quartermaster wich in turn toke it over to the Military Officials & demandet an other loaf in lieu of the one containing the Mouse nest wich request got granted instantly. 19/ Saturday 8 Internees wher called to goe to Victoria Barracks, for reasons unknown. They returned during the afternoon they returned, but on account of same having being in an infested area, as Sydney wher declared quarantine on account of the "flu" they wher put into a separate Camp, erected some time ago.
[Continued on page 59]

[Page 58]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 17/6]
Deportation Of Aliens.
Arrangements Proceeding.
No Decision Yet.

Melbourne. Thursday. – Regarding a report that a large number of German internees were shortly to be deported from the Commonwealth, Mr. Watt stated to-night that some months ago the Federal Government appointed a committee, of which Senator Fairbairn was chairman, to consider a number of problems which would arise at the close of the war in relation to aliens and to aliens’ property.
The committee has made a series of recommendations, based to some extent upon the recommendations of a similar body in Great Britain, which involved, amongst other things, a decision as to the number of men who were to be deported from Australia after the proclamation of peace. In addition, a special commission was recently appointed to deal with the question of the release of individual internees.
No general report has yet been submitted by this body. The Government has under consideration the report of Senator Fairbairn’s committee, and had dealt with the bulk of it. They were also in communication with the British authorities as to the arrangements which the Commonwealth might make when the proper time arrived for the deportation of certain classes of alien enemies.

[Page 59]
[Continued from page 57]
behind the old Mans compound.
20/ Today the Police came & toke all their belongings out. It is the rumor, as those wher all lawabiding Internees, they would be returned to liberty. During the Dinner parade a officer appeared & called about 600 Internees & ordered them to appear at the Austrian Hall at 2 p. m. Hier they were told to be ready for transportation at the end of the month, they would recieve 24 hours notice previously. To hawe all their luggage ready. 84 lb would be permitted free, however over that weight each hundert pound would cost the Internees 1 & pound;. & pound; 4 would be permitted in the Internees possession but over that amount would be transferred per Bank draft. The Internees called amounted to about 600 & as far as can trace all, who had applied for repatriation previously to Germany. Everybody is taxing his luggage, so as to be able not to hawe overweight, within 90 per cent amounts to the Clothing they have on their body & some presents they manufactured during the idle hours of their internment – 21 The following notice wher issued to the inmates of this Camp regarding their luggage:: It is notified for the information of all concerned, that persens who are released or repatriated from this Camp will be entitled to the free conveyance of eighty four (84) lbs of luggage only, including all tools of trade ectra. Signed R. Hollman Lieut Col. Comander G. C. C: Now this is unjust to all of us, as we were brought to this State per special train free of charge, & all our belongings also, no matter the weight, that the Government now expekts the Internees

[Page 60]

who are maney, on account of the long internment are without means, to pay, as many Internees wher compelled on account of the many idle hours, to manufactur articles of some sort or another & as the money wher scarce, did not like dispose of same "for a song" & preffered to Keep same for Keep sakes of their internement, as all the articles had been mostly made to pass the time away & in consequence, wher in most instances tidious work wich had taken months to finishe. Now Internees are compelled to leave their work behind, as they hawe not got the money to pay for freightage. The Seaman wich wher taken of the German Ships, laying in Australian Ports at the comencement of this war, aplied to the Represantive in the Camp for the German shipping firms & wher informed, that the Seafaring Man of the diverse Company, could leave everything over this weight, at the Store in charge of the Authoritys & the Company would see, that it would be forwardet to Germany. In addition, as the usual monthly payment would fall out, they would be payd two months wages in advance, to help them to buy anything they wished to take with them on or during the voyage. Another unjust action I must report & that is that Internees over 45 years of age are not permitted to remain in Australia, if they wishe to do so. In some instances the Internees hawe residet in the Commonwealth for over a quarter of a Century but on account of the long captivity behind wires & the streneous life therein, have left their tell tale marke & are beginning to get shaky in their body & so allmost
[Continued on page 63]

[Page 61]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 23/4]
Germans’ Escape.
Sensation At Darlinghurst.
Sentry Gagged And Bound.
Two Escapees Captured, One At Liberty.

Under sensational circumstances three German internees, named Heinrich Schonhoebet, Paul Willms, and W. Salewsky, escaped from Darlinghurst Detention Barracks yesterday morning, after having overpowered the sentry.
Schonhoebet and Salewsky were apprehended soon after, and Willms is now at liberty.
The affair occurred at about 8. 30, when four internees were sent out to wash the yard. They obeyed with an alacrity, that, at the time, did not arouse suspicion, and the sentry following had no occasion to hurry them on. They left the yard to fill their buckets, and returned a minute later. The sentry stood by the gate to let them in and directed them to their task. But this they did not do, as, immediately he told them to get to work all dropped buckets and sprang on him.
Sentry Overpowered.
The sentry was overpowered in a second, in a minute his wrists & ankles were bound with ropes one of the men pulled out from inside his shirt. The sentry was absolutely surprised, and before he could shout an alarm he was thrown on the ground and while on his back saw three of the men rush to the wall of the yard, the fourth standing by the sentry. He was evidently not keen on escaping.
Ignoring their comrade, Meyer, whose withdrawal from the escape they did not then seem to notice, the three others rushed to the wall facing Burton Street and Darlinghurst Road, and, with the aid of an iron grille, climbed to the top of the wall. Before the last man jumped over to the street side he looked round and shouted something in German to Meyer. With this parting menace of farewell he disappeared.
But not for long. A few minutes after Meyer took the gag from the mouth of the sentry, whose cries for help immediately bought other members of the guard.
The Escape.
The three men separated soon after they reached Darlinghurst Road. Salewsky made off in the direction of William Street, while Schonhoebel went to the Green Park in front of St. Vincent’s Hospital. Constables Maher and Arnold noticed Salewsky walking along the pavement in William Street, and having heard of the escape they approached him. He denied that he was one of the wanted men, but they persuaded him to go to the police station. Salewsky could have put up a good fight had he wished, as he was pretty powerful. But the fact that his apprehension occurred in a busy part of Darlinghurst induced him to go along. And when he reached the station he realised the game was up, as he was immediately identified. He looked very disappointed and expressed his feeling in his native language until ordered to shut up by some of the police.
Ringleader Caught.
In the meantime Schonhoebel, who was the most powerful of the trio, and appeared to have been the ringleader, met misfortune. When he jumped from the top of the wall he attracted the attention of a crowd of people in Green Park, and this crowd in turn acted as a magnet to Constable Lawless. As soon as Schonhoebel saw the crowd he rushed through the park, with Constable Lawless, who had seen the three men jump from the wall, in chase.
Pursued and pursuer ran to Victoria Street, upon turning into which Constable Lawless gained on his quarry. Near the Sacred Heart Hospice for the Dying he overtook the German, who, stopping, turned with his back to the wall. He presented a formidable sight with his massive shoulders and height of 6ft. 3in. His size seemed to be all the greater in comparison to the slight build of the constable, who now endeavoured to handcuff him. The German demanded to know "Who are you?" to which was replied "A constable. "
"I Won’t Go. "
"I won’t go with you," the German said after a pause, in which he sized up the constable.
"Well, if you don’t I will have to shoot you," replied Constable Lawless, who made a move towards his revolver pocket, which this time, anyhow, was empty.
But Schonhoebel did not know this. His reply was: "Shoot me if you like. I want my liberty. I am tired of being in prison. I am tired of it all. Freedom is what I want. Anyhow, I’ve been shot before – twice. Perhaps you can make a job or it this time. "
However, he consented to go along to the police station. Before proceeding far, he commenced to murmur his displeasure at the turn events had taken, and his anger was intensified by the sight of the crowd following. Constable Lawless expected an attack from his prisoner at any minute, and, seeing two soldiers, he asked them to "stand by," and with them in attendance he was able to get his man to the station.
Paul Willms, who is still at liberty, is 24 years of age, and 5ft. 10in. in height. He is of athletic build, with an unusually dark complexion, and his body is tattooed. He has black hair, a black moustache, and, when last seen, was wearing a brown suit. His detention at the barracks was in connection with a disturbance there on March 26.
Schonhoebel was being detained at the barracks awaiting the decision of the confirming authorities into a charge of attempted escape on March 18.
At the original inquiry evidence was given that on that evening a large hole was found bored in the wall of Schonhoebel’s cell. An iron bar had also been cut out of the gate with a table knife, and a large stone had been removed from the wall of the cell and blankets used as mufflers.
Schonhoebel then denied the charge. His story was that he made the opening to let in fresh air on account of the stuffiness of the cells.

[Additional newspaper cutting with handwritten date – 22/4 1919]
Stop-Press
Daring Escape
Three Germans bound and gagged a sentry at Darlinghurst Detention Barracks this morning and escaped.
One was recaptured almost immediately, and a second was secured within half an hour in Darlinghurst-road.
The third is still at large.

[Page 62]

[Newspaper cutting with handwritten date – 23/4]
Military Methods.
The Missing German Willms.
Court-Martial Fooled.

A searchlight was thrown yesterday morning upon some of the methods of the military authorities. On April 15 Paul Willms, a prisoner of war, was charged before a court-martial with conduct, whilst confined in Darlinghurst Goal on March 26, to the prejudice of the control of prisoners of war by making undue noise. When the inquiry had reached a certain stage Willms asked for an adjournment until yesterday. In the meantime Willms, along with two other German confinees at Darlinghurst, escaped from custody, and although his two mates were promptly brought back to their place of confinement, Willms has not been recaptured.
With the fact in front of them that the prisoner whose case was to be further heard yesterday was still at large, the members of the court were allowed to assemble. They had not been notified that as there was no ghost there could be no staging of Hamlet. The members of the court, who had work to see to in their own particular departmental spheres, quickly conceived the idea that one of the many telephones installed within the big military quadrangle could have been utilised for the purpose of passing on word that the court was "off," as the prisoner was "unavoidably absent. "
This seems to be the military way of doing things. If the system were to obtain in the civil courts there would be something more heard about it.

[Page 63]

[Continued from page 61]
unable to earn their livelihood through manual toil. This is another instance, that the Government treats their worker after years of hard strugle, when their constitution want permitt to work hard any more in a shameful fashion & casts them on the scrapheap. I know of one Intern (Tiadem) who has residet in Australia for over 30 years & has followed the trade as Baker in Victoria & Western Australia, also nationaliced in this Country for over 20 years, has been informed that he must depart for Germany. (State lying account of Swiss Consul as reported in the dailys. ) also Holdsworthy Himmel) This day 22nd 3 Internees effected a sensetional escape at Darlinghurst (state account) 23/ During evening hours, some Internees, who had made an effigy of the Camp Comandant Hollman, hung same up, on one of the electric lightpoles, about 30 feet high, wher this effigy hung all night. 24/ This morning while on our morning parade, the Soldiers attending to us notified the dummy & reported it to Lieutenant Drummond, wich came & viewed same & ordered, to take it down. To the amusement of many Internees, they suxceedet to reach the top of the pole & cut it down. As the face of this dummy had been painted, resembling the Comandants features, also Boer war medals galore, wich the Internees had cut out of Jam tins, the Soldiers noticed the joke instantly & 3 Soldiers (Police) toke the effigy out of the Camp to the Police Station, as if they had left it in the Camp, they would have found it hanging some wher else. The joke of the day was, That a

[Page 64]

Coroners Court of enquirey had taken place during the morning at the Police Station & that the Coroner Major Hollborrow had found the following verdict "That the Camp Comandant Col. Hollman had committed suicide by hanging while of unsund mind. This day the following notice wher issued to us. "Any Internees who may desire befor the Allies board, to aply for permission to remain in Australia must submitt this aplication to the Comander in writing before 4 p. m on the 25 instant. The following information must be includet in the application (1) age of aplicant (2) length of time the aplicant has residet in Australia (3) family reasones & how many Children (if married) (4) if aplicants symphaties are likely to be australian and why. (5) What property they hawe in Australia (6) ocupation (7) prospects of obtaining employment ectra. Aplicants may write & obtaining information they desire to submit to the Board, as for the purposse of obtaining refferences as to Character ectra. Those who hawe aplied for repatriation will not be permitted to make aplicationes to remain in Australia or appear before the Alliens board. Signed R. Hollman Comandant G. C. C. This notice caused great excitement amongst the Internees, as we all looked upon this notice, as a humilation of our race, & a Men who would crawl on his Knees to the Government, to be permitted to remain in Australia, after this sayd Government had robbed the Internee of his liberty, just becourse he happen to be born in Germany, wher not a Man but an Imbecile & the Government would be wellcome to his residence in Australia. Consequently, several documents wher
[Continued on page 66]

[Page 65]

[Newspaper clipping with hand written date – 1/5 19]
Tindale Case
Again Before Court Martial
Verdict Of Not Guilty

This case of Warrant-Officer Charles Ernest Tindale was again before a court martial at Victoria Barracks today.
He was charged with having, on various dates in 1916 (whilst acting as Quartermaster-Sergeant at Holdsworthy Concentration Camp), received from J. L. Ashcroft, on behalf of E. J. Ashcroft and Sons, butchers, Liverpool various sums of money as a reward for seeing that tins of fat sold by the military authorities were properly filled.
Lieut. -Colonel V. le Gay Brereton attended as Judge Advocate. The court, which is a general court martial, consisted of Lieut. -Colonel Kindon (President), Major Meyers M. C. , Captain Spain, Captain Andersson, and Captain Lloyd.
Major Bowie Wilson and Captain Candy appeared to prosecute, and Lieut. -Colonel Lenehan for the defence.
Tindale pleaded not guilty to all the charges, which numbered eight.
The prosecution’s case was that Tindale had arranged with Ashcroft to receive 2s on every tin of fat sold to him by the camp authorities.
James Frederick Mulligan, secretary to the district paymaster, said that he was present with others when Tindale was interrogated.
Tindale had said that the Germans had refused to boil fat down unless they got something out of it. He had admitted that Ashcroft had given him 2s and 1s 6d for testing the tins of fat, as the Germans used to put water in the tins. Most of the money so received was divided up amongst the mess to which he belonged, so that they could pay a German cook and a couple of waiters.
Rubbish In The Tins
Leslie James Ashcroft said that in October, 1916, when he complained about the tins of fat being delivered short and containing rubbish, Colonel Sands told him to talk to Tindale. He told Tindale that he would have to discontinue taking the fat, and Tindale suggested that he should send a man out to supervise it. Witness told him that it would not pay to do that. Then he believed that Tindale suggested that he would look after it, and an arrangement was made that he should be paid 1s or 2s per tin – he could not remember which – to see that the tins were filled and free of rubbish.
Colonel Lenehan: It has been suggested that Tindale received money belonging to the Government?
Witness: The suggestion was not made by me. The Government got its 8s per tin under the contract.
How much meat does a soldier get a day? – One and a half pounds.
How much does a German internee get? Ten ounces, but it used to be a pound and a quarter. I know that the Germans received some of the money for the fat sold to me.
Without calling on the defence the court found Tindale not guilty on all the charges, and he was discharged.

Red Triangle Appeal
This morning Sir Henry Lander, who yesterday sent a highly commendatory letter on Y. M. C. A. work as he has seen it among the troops, paid a further tribute to the Red Triangle in a communication to the Sydney citizens’ committee of the Y. M. C. A. The Newcastle Council heads a long list of local authorities who have written promising support to the appeal which has been launched for funds to maintain the services of the Y. M. C. A. among Australian troops until the close of demobilisation. It is expected that committees through the State will be active within the coming two weeks. Several have already substantial amounts in hand for the fund.

[Page 66]

[Continued from page 64]
forwardet, some by Sailors [indecipherable] had no intentiones to remain whatever. I seen one aplication wich stated, that they wished to remain in Australia to await Billy Hughes & Carpenter Pearces return, so that they could asist humanity & wipe them of the face of the earth. No signature wher giwen. Another letter wich stated, that their symphaties wher australian , becourse the Workers hier, wher the last to wake up, also becourse the forefathers of the english race, had been brought out in Convict ships in Chains, haveing being picked out by some of the best judges in England. No signature wher given. My own aplication read the following: As per notification this day, that it is compulsory to hand in a written aplication, if the Internee wishes to remain in Australia. I wish to state herby, that this is my desire, for family reasones. Any questiones asked of me, I am fully prepared to answer same truthfully, when given the chance to appear before this sayd board. Signed Bungardy. 26/ Notice that Internees who had been notified for repatriation, could hawe their luggage weighted free of charge in front of the Police Station. During this afternoon another notice that all those notified must proceed to the hospital, to be vaccinated oculated; to this every one is quite willing Knowing that the liberty is so near at hand. (State account how officials gused Internees labor to their own proffit.
27/Friday the Police discovered another hohle dug in the Compaddor wich had enabled a few Interneees to escape lately, as this hole comenced at the mouth of a tunnel, wich led several yards underneath the fence & came up behind same & so the much coveted liberty
[Continued on page 69]

[Page 67]

[Letter how officials used Intenees labor to their own proffit 26/4/19 - written on top of following blank page]

14/6 1916 5 Men working 2 months produced 550 each per forthnight pay 14 bob other 4 2/ after 2 gang 8 forenoon 8 afternoon each 1 s/ 600-700 per forthnight the workers had to splitt and carry wood to pit. 4 Burners only attentet the pit. The majority of Charcoal dispossed Liverpool & Private, special the time of the Coalstrike. Couldnt manufacture anough. Report like living allways & made by L Rosserk. sold by Griffiths & Sands, also Hollman also & fenchsman private Clothing, making an estimate & giving order for so many bags to Hollman. Stuff carted to Railway mostly by 2 Internees Jakoles & Moonshine, Orders said plenty to Standard Way Ltd also freecing Work. Captain Edens time also Capt Holloways time as Officer for the works mostly order send away. Road Making Road belongs Southerland Council, all Government property. no Private. Employed 157. Men. wages 2/ per diem. finished 2 miles recalled by military orders. Proposal made for roadmaking leading to private farms. Road measured & pegged but not started. Wattle Bark 2 Parties selected gather bark for Private Tannery Liverpool by Working Officers. No wages, but half the proceeds of sale. Worked months, untill parties ceased voluntary on account Officers allways having disputes between themself re carting. In consequence Internees had to await for money carried, as no payment untill sale. Solem belief between Internees, that some officers divitet ½ between themself while others recieved nothing, their
fore the ocuring disputes Several Officers ordered steel from the Military [indecipherable] to Camp for the purpose of hawing private Lathes in old

[Page 68]

Letter how officials used Intenees labor to their own proffit 26/4/19

[Page 69]

[Continued from page 66]
Several Internees who had been notified for deportation wher continued in the oculation process.
28/ This morning Military Police entered Camp with a long list of Names of Internees, they wher told to appear at the maingate with blankets & eating utensils, when about 80 had arived they wher marched to the Railway Station, when the others apeared they wher told to return & park all their belongings, wich of course they obeyed. Shortly after the others also returned to park their luggage Thance they proceedet to the to the Maingate, when about 50 had arived they wher led out, all their luggage parked on a vehicle wich the authorities had graciously permitted to cart same to the Railway Station. Every body thought, this wher the start of our long waited for repatriation. But alas, what a mistake. At the Station wher huts errected. The luggage wher dumped on the ground. Hier about 10 Military Police began the searching process. Evey article wher thoroughly searched, for hidden documents, any written matter, not censored wher confiscated. Of all wearing apearal issued by the Government they wher permitted, to keep 2 articles respektively. When this process wher finished, they were led 1 by 1 to another tenth, Hierin wher the Comandant Hollborrow & Inteligence Officer Bardsly, the former Provost Marshall to this Camp. They wher charged for not appearing at the Parade on March the first & asked, how they plead; as about 90 per cent of the Internees wher those who had been spending the whole day at the Racecourse, as previously stated, at the end of the last Strike, & on their return had their Names taken, they mostly all, pleadet guilty, no other questiones being asked
[Continued on page 71]

[Page 70]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 8/5 19]
The Sun, Wednes
"Kaiser Will Return"
Von Luckner’s Opinion
War Prisoners From N. Z.
Auckland, Wednesday.
A detachment of 168 prisoners of war has been despatched from Wellington for transport by the Willochra, which will sail to-day to embark prisoners from Australia.
The Auckland party comprises 87 Germans, many of whom were interned since the occupation of Samoa, 80 Jugo-Slavs, and one Austrian, all of whom desire repatriation, and includes Comander von Luckner and his lieutenant, Kircejles, of the raider See Adler, and other members of the former Samoan Administration.
The greatest excitement prevailed amongst the Germans in camp before the departure, and the highest spirits were displayed.
Von Luckner, wearing a new uniform with four ribbons, was loudly farewelled by his friends in his own tongue.
Speaking at Auckland to an officer, von Luckner said that the Kaiser would return to the throne. He made no remark about the German Navy.
Forty Germans remain in the internment camp. The former German and Austrian Consuls have been released on parole on the ground of ill-health.

Well-groomed and Well Fed

Wellington (N. Z. ), Wednesday.
When 168 internees, including 13 women and children, and 80 Jugo-Slavs, left Auckland internment camp to entrain for the Willochra, all appeared in the highest spirits. Count von Luckner, in naval uniform, was as excited as a schoolboy, and boasted that the Kaiser would return to the throne.
All looked well fed and well groomed, and many wore new clothes.
The departure was kept secret, but small boys counted the party out as it marched through the streets. The boys also sang "Good-bye. "
Dr. Schultz, Von Luckner, and other officers and the women and children were accommodated in motor cars.
The party will be joined by about 150 internees from Featherston internment camp to-day.
It is expected that the Willochra will leave via Australia to-morrow.

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 7/5]
German Internees.
Unfounded Allegations.
Treatment In Concentration Camps.

We have been handed a statement by Senator Gardiner, Messrs. Brookfield, M. L. A. and E. E. Judd, alleging ill-treatment by the military authorities whilst incarcerated at the Holdsworthy Internees’ Camp and at Longwarrin.
We have made inquiries the treatment of inmates at the Holdsworthy camp, and it is learnt from a reliable source that the allegations are without foundation. The internees have little to complain of in the treatment meted out to them. It is pointed out that some very bad characters are locked up among the Germans in our camps, but that generally the fullest efforts have been made to do justice to all.
A number of the allegations in the statement are in reference to the Langwarrin camp, which is in Victoria, and are supposed to have occurred as far back as 1914 and 1915.

[Page 71]

[Continued from page 69]
regarding their deffence, but sentenced to 28 days, arrest on the I scale of diet, vic water & bread. Than they wher taken to the newly errected Camp, wich contained only tents, & 12 Internees had to house in one round military tent, wich contained convinent Rooms for only 4 persons. Now as the Camp has been quite for a long time, the authorities try to incite the Internees again, to act combined against the rules & regulations in some way or another, but better councils prevail, They want get another chance, as this is another "dudge" of the Government "to safe" even at the expence of their defenceless internees, as about the 150 Internees sentenced to day, will mean the saving of their just foodstuffs entitled to, if not sentenced. Every Internee had forgotten about the strike long ago, but the Officials, wich run this Camp hawe not, as this unjust action shows, Still the word "fair play & justice is the watchword of the english speaking race. Enough fair excamples, I hawe stated, to prove, that this only excists in print but not in deeds, at this Camp. Up untill end of the month all lived in high glee of the anticipation of their early release. Allmost every Internee had his luggage in readiness, as every one thought "might be I will be on the next list. May comenced & still nothing definete regarding the first transport however the 5/ the following Notice wher issued to the inmates of the Camp. "The following instructions are posted for the information of all concerned. The allowance of 84 lb baggage will for the purposs of measurements be considerate to aproximate 5 cubic feet & this will be the totall amount carried free of charge for each Internee, wether adult or child. Internees hawing luggage in excess of 84 lbs must make all necessary arangements with the shipping agents for forwarding & shipping

[Page 72]

excess baggage for Internees proceeding on the "Willochra" will not be able to acompany them on this ship, all available freight space has been filled at New Zealand. But arangements may be made to ship it on a early subsequent ship Internees embarking on the Willochra, who hawe baggage in the propertystore, can attend by companies at the store to sellect & arrange their property to meet the requirements of the above instructiones. Signed R. Hollman Comandant. During the evening hours of the 6/, a sharp shot whistled over our Camp, the motives for same wher unknown nor even disclosed to any of the Internees. 7/ During the forenoon, the Internees sellected to proceed on the Willochra, wher adressed by the Comandanat, regarding Clothing & how much money each Internee would be permitted to hawe in his possession when going on board of the transport. That each Internee who wher in need of Clothing would get same upon aplication at the Store previously to the departure. Also that each Internee upon liberation from this Camp would recieve 5 Shillings out of the Canteen funds, to enable them to buy necessary tobacco ectra for the journey. The sume of & pound; 6 would be advisable to take in the Internees possession, the rest to hawe it forwardet by Bank draft, or any other arangement. 15/ All the luggage belonging to Internees sellected for the first transfer had to be delivered at the Gate for censoring. Each piece of clothing or any other article in the luggage had to be written on a list & handet into the censor, so that nothing could escape the eye of the Censor, who had to perform his dutys in the interest of the Government, to see that nothing would get out of this Camp wich might bring a bad name, as Internees might hawe direct proves amongst their luggage, regarding the treatment recieved during their long term of internment
[Continued on page 74]

[Page 73]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 18/5 19]
Costly Censorship
War Bill Items
Interned Enemies & pound; 203,906
Melbourne, Saturday.
In the quarterly statement issued by the Federal Treasurer to-day, dealing with the nine months ended March 31, 1919, it was stated that the pay to censors and their staffs, and telegraphs, postage and other expenditure incidental to the offices of the censors, amounted to & pound; 29,521 16s 11d.
The expenses of chemists and muni-

[Page 74]

[Continued from page 72]
The Internees sellected a Comittee for each transport to work in the Interess of the Internees in general & to see to their welfare while on the transport & during the voyage. On this day a notice wher issued that no birds or dogs would be permitted on the transport. During the 4 years internment, the Internees in several instances had bought parrots or Cocotoos, other kinds of birds, wich they had teached during the many weary hours to toke or sing beautifully. Now they must part with them for a song. also well trained dogs, two 3 dogs especially a bullterrier a terrier & a poodle. The Internees offered to pay freight for those three dogs, but wher unsuxcessfull, in one instance the owner had asked for permission of the Minister of Deffence Departement some time ago, to be acompained by his dog on the transport, wich got then granted, now however the permission wher withdrawn. This 3 dogs wher indeet trained & hod a college education, they would have been a boom in any circus or varity stage. The owners of those dogs value them at & pound; 100. Allthough as formerly stated, the Internees offered willingnes to pay freightage for their pets, same meet with refusal, but recieved the answer, to dispose of same, as best they could. As 90 per cent of the Internees be repatriated, the unfortunate Internees could not find any buyers & the Military Police, knowing the surounding circumstances offered a few shillings, knowing that later they might hawe the chance in getting same for nothing. The 16/ 17/ & 18/ the whole Military Police wher busy inside the Camp searching for a tunnel, wich the spies amongst the Internees had reported to them, to excist. During the 17/ a heavy wagon

[Page 75]

loadet with five tons of rocks & gravel wher drawn by five horses close around the outside fence, in anticipation that when their wagon would drive over the spot, the ground might break in, but nothing wher noticed out of the common with this experiment. 18/ During the forenoon a heavy Engine on 4 wheels, pulled also by 5 horses, wher pulled around the Barbwire fence, untill same got stuck in the ground of the formerly Internees garden becourse, hawing rained heavily during the past days, the ground at this place were indeet soft. Seeing that the atempt to pull same out of the bog wher futile, the driver unharnesed the horses & amids Cheers & hurras given by the Internees wendet his way to the Military stables & left the Engine their untill the next day, when with the assistance of more horses, they wher suxcessfull, to extradict same. 19/ During this afternoon the Police wher successfull in finding the entrance to the much loacked for tunnel. It comenced in the 8 Mess of the 35 Company. The Inmates of this mess, had given permission to comence operation from their. The Internees who had worked on the job & who wished to escape by that way, numbered 38, several boys belowe 20 years of age. The partie cut a hohle in the flooring of the mess about 2 foot square & dug down about 6 feet, thance they cut the tunnel in the direction of the fence wich wher about 30 feet. As the underground consisted partly of slate, the work must hawe been indeet trying, as it toke 1 week to cut away 4 feet of this slate; ones through this
[Continued on page 77]

[Page 76]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 23/4 19]
Back To Germany

The first batch of German and Austrian prisoners of war who are being repatriated from New Zealand and Australia is expected to leave Sydney to-day by the troopship Willochra. Those on board include Count con Luckner, commander of the raider See Adler, and who afterwards failed in a sensational attempt to escape on a scow; Navigating Lieut. Kircheiss, of the same vessel; Dr. E. Schultz, formerly Governor of Samoa; and Dr. G. Seessons, formerly agricultural adviser there. Capt. Brown is in command of the steamer which is proceeding to Rotterdam for orders.

At a meeting of the general committee of the Red Cross Society Major Lamb, assistant Red Cross commissioner in London for some time, will deliver an address at 255A George Street at 3 p. m. on Wednesday,

[Page 77]

[Continued from page 75]
the work wher easier, on acount of the clay ground. When discovered, this tunnelling partie averaged 9 feet daily. It wher about 60-feet long & 4 feet belowe the ground & several feet behind the outer barb wire fence. Another 3-4 days & this partie would hawe had their tiresome work crowned with success, as it must hawe been a tiresome job indeed. Only 1 Internee could work at the time, as the dimension of the hohle messured about 2 feet by 18 inches & could only manage to work ½ hour at the time, as the Candle would not keep alight on account of the foul air. Previous to the next one going down, he pumped freshe air down the so called shaft. The Police did not arrest any one, but filled the hohle in again with new earth. Hawing heard that another tunnel wher in existence somewher, they continued the search all the Week. The Spys amongst us Internees had heard something, but not rightly. This tunnelling partie had started on two other places previously to the formerly mentioned place, but had given it up, on account of the rocky ground. During this week, the Camp had 3 issues of cheese ration, being part of the amount due to the Camp, since the strike. A Notice has been issued that 47 Internees wher taken of the Repatriation list per S. S. Willochra, on account of short space, but same would goe with the second transport, the "Kursk. " Another Notice stated the following: Willochra passengers in need of clothing, to report at Main Gate: Needless to say fully 98 per cent appeared & they recieved, a shirt, boots & if their overcoat wher bad, they would get a New one, also those who dit not hawe a suit, they recieved, a suit. So that wasnt bad of the Government, as I am

[Page 78]

sure 60 per cent of the Internees would hawe left this Camp, on their long journey, only dressed in a loin cloth & barefooted, as all the boots issued during the past 18 months, wher secondhand & did not last the time specyfied by the Authorities. On account of the consistent rain during the past week, the Camp is a Sea of mud, & this makes Internment life still more tire some, the only dry place is the much overcrowded Barrack. Two old Internees, both over 50 years of age, died at the hospital, one with Asthma & the other Pnumonia. It wher a bad luck, as the end of the Confinement is indeed near at hand. 10/ During this evening several Internees arived from Berrima Camp, to remain hier untill their Boat is ready for repatriation. This consisted in most instances, the Captains, Officers & Ingeneur of the Interned German Ships, found in Australian Waters at the comencement of the War. 23/ Several Austrian Internees taken out of Camp & transfered to the so called "Old Mens Compound The old Internees hawing being brought back to the Main Camp. In the Majority of the Austrianes had applied, to remain in Australia, but a few refused & demandet repatriation 27/ This day the list of Names for second Transport Kursk wher issued to the Camp. It amounted to 196 Names. As the majority of the Trial Bay Internees (The wealthy Internees) also all married Internees with their Wifes & familys will also proceed by this transport, would not permitt same to take more. All the German Imperial Soldiers & Naval Men amongst the later being the Crew of the Emden & the former all the Soldiers who had been wounded at Kiauthou
[Continued page 80]

[Page 79]

[Newspaper clipping with handwritten date – 28/5 19]
Hush-Sh!

A Deadly Secret

Germans On Willochra

Austrians Landed

[The following is printed inside a box]
The Willochra, which brought German and Austrian deportees from New Zealand, disembarked the Austrians to-day to make room for more Huns from Holdsworthy prior to sailing. But no one knows anything about it.
{End of boxed section]

Great secrecy was observed by the military authorities in connection with the deportation of interned aliens by the Willochra to-day.
Public curiosity was whetted by a desire to know the reasons for this reticence on the part of the Defence Department, as the New Zealand Government, when the aliens left the Dominion, supplied the press with the fullest information, even the names of the principal men deported being given.
From comparatively early this morning a number of sightseers tried to gain admittance to the wharf at Pyrmont, where the Willochra is lying.
Shortly after 11 o’clock there was a stir among those waiting outside the barriers as a special train passed slowly down the wharf.
But the carriages proved to be empty.
Direct To Germany
The explanation was that the Willochra, which is going direct to Germany, will carry only Germans, while the special train was intended to convey the Austrians on board the vessel to Holdsworthy camp.
When the train drew up at the side of the ship a fairly large body of soldiers who had been waiting on the wharf formed a guard near the gangway.
After several New Zealand officers and men had come ashore, the Austrians, two of whom were manacled, came down the gangway to the number of about 130, and entered the carriages.
When all were on board the train soldiers were stationed on the platforms at each end of the compartments.
As the train moved slowly from the wharf the Austrians, with their faces beaming from the windows, and their arms projecting towards the vessel, waved farewells to their friends on board.
The Willochra will probably sail about 4 o’clock this afternoon after having received a number of Germans from Holdsworthy camp to take the place of the Austrians.

A picture of the Austrians coming ashore from the Willochra appears on Page 8.

[Page 80]

[Continued from page 79]
China & taken Prisoners by the Japanese shortly after the comencement of the War. The healthy Pris had remained in Japan, while all woundet & disabled Soldiers had been transferred hier, as formerly mentioned. It is now about 6 weeks ago, since the Internees marked for first transport hawe waited for the day to come, when the big Gate would open for them for the last time. If every transport takes as long, as the first, I am positive, this Camp will still have some unlucky ones in 12 months time. On this day 8 married Internees arived from the Monoglo Camp, among those wher a boy four years of age, who dit not like to leave his father. As they wher all on the list for the II transport they wher brought hier, to be handy. Their Wifes had to proceed to Sydney, A following Notice wher issued: Internees to be repatriated S. S. Willochra are permitted to take the sume of & pound; 50 on board Ship in cashe or documents. They may dispose of their bank ballance as they wishe, providing same does not leave the Comonwealth of Australia. 27/ Today is the long waited for day by all Inmates of any Internment Camp in Australia. Still Raining heavily. Those who had to proceed to the Willochra recieved their dinner at 10 45 p. m. At 11 15 all fell in at the big Gate in alphabetic order. Some had mad Shoulder bags others had hand luggage. If they had nothing else each had providet himself with lug Sandwiches for the journey & so wher prepared for anything. Handshaking galore in with smiling faces like Shoolboys, they wendet their way out of the big Gate. It is impossible for the Reader to

[Page 81]

Imagine, what joy it means to get away, from this Camp, wher mostly had been forced to remain years, for no fault of their own but birth right & only a skunk denys his Nationality They marshed 2 & 2 towards the waiting Railway Carriages. The first train left this Camp shortly after 1 p. m, to proceed to Sydney. The second batch left shortly after 3. P. m. by another train. The totall amount wher 645 German Huns, but all Men. Amongst the last batch wher all the Inmates of Singh Singh Compound. As stated previously, all this inmates wher classed by the Authorities, as Convicts & Undesireables of the worst type. They came out singing happily, clad in all kinds of appearal. The escort from Singh Singh to the train, a distant of about 300 yards consisted of 10 Soldiers fully armed leading, about 20 Soldiers fully armed behind, in adition of 2 Officers on Horse back. 5 Internees who had been put their by the Authoritys during the last Strike, wher brought back in to the Main Compound about 5 p. m. As the little boy wich came into the Camp with his father wher so young he wher much fuss made off. Every one wished for his company & he hardly wher a few hours in this Camp, when he had presents gallore, the wealthy ones presented him with small sums of money, the buisnes firms in this Camp presented him with Cakes & diverse other foodstuffs 28. Internees notiefied to proceed by transport Kurske

[Page 82]

wher informed to proceed to the luggage store, to sellect same & to hawe it censored. It whas a buissy day for the Police & the Censores indeed. 29/ This morning the Internees proceeding with the "Kursk" had to hand in their blankets at 6 a. m. at 10 20, the dinner wher issued to them at 11 oclock they proceedet with their hand luggage to the maingate, to be ready to goe to the waiting train. The whole Camp wher day, shaking hands & shouting with joy & hurrahing. This time the Camp brass band wich had allready disbandet assembled & gawe a hearthy sendoff to the lucky ones. The second one wher a more hearty send off than the first. This I think wher due to the fact that they realise now that the end is near. I think everything is topsy turvy in the Intelligence departement. I am shure they don’t know who is still hier & who is away, as this morning a Mens name wher sung out for repatriation with the Kurske, who had allready left with the Willochra, in another instance a Internee Otto Ehrlich wher discovered still in Camp, when the authoritys thought him to be on board the Willochra allready, after a lot of trouble they found out that a Internee by the Name of Friedrich Ehrlich had been sent by the Willochra by mistake of the Camp authoritys. At 4 p. m general call for those who wished to be repatriated, The Provost Marshall Drummond told me personally that this wher done for the purposse of finding out for certain who wishes to be repatriated or not, as

[Page 83]

this Government did not deported any Internees against their will, with the exception of the Singh Singh Internees In all instances those who had been deported, had put their Names on the Repatriation list, sometime or another. I demonstrated with him in the Case of Phyllipe who had been forced against his will to goe with the Willochra, also the case of Edwards. The former to b was a Traveler for a Sydney firm previous to his internment & the later a well known Melbourne Merchant. This two Gentleman told me personally that they never aplied for repatriation, as all their interesse & Money was invested in Australia. The Camp is much easier in regards of discipline. No more daily parades, but I think this is on acount of the Rain. Neither is the Lock up over filled as usually, as the Police do not arrest the Internees for minor offences as formerly. This day their are only 9 Internees in the lockup, mostly for being in possession of illicet stills. Whiskey is plenty full, a smal Nobler cost 3 pence a big one 6 pence. The Whiskey wher much in evidence today, as several of the Internees repatriated per Kurske, went through the gate in the presents of the G. M. P drunk. During the evening hours their ar Bonfires to be found allmost between each Barrack. This are in Kerosine tins below the blinds, as the weather is cold & rainy. Wood is now plentyfull, as those Internees wich wher repatriated left tables, chairs & benches behind galore, wich they had made out of bushwood at
[Continued on page 85]

[Page 84]

[Newspaper clipping of large photograph which is headed:
Austrian Internees
and then below the photo (which shows men presumably disembarking from a ship) is printed the following:
The Austrian internees leaving the Willochra to-day for Holdsworthy camp. ]

[Page 85]

[Continued from page 83]
their comencement of Internees out of Bush timber. When the evening Sydney Paper arived in Camp it contained a Print of the Passengers repatriated per S. S. Kursk. Amongst the list wher the Names of 3 Wifes, whos Husbands wher still in this Camp. Needless to say, these Internees wher very much upsett, as 2 of their Wifes wher australian born of englishe descent & unable to speak any other language but englishe. These 3 Internees aplied for information of the Camp Head office but without success. 30/ This morning all those, who wishe to remain in Australia must appear at the Enquiry office in the following routationes 1. Internees from Queensland II N. S. W. I II Victoria. IV S. A. & W. A. shurly we hawe been asked often anough, who wishes to stay & who wishes to depart. But this is the rule in the G. C. C. Questiones asked over & over again. Inside the Compound several smal Comittes hawe been formed, to asist the Authoritys in the Repatriation Question in several diverse ways. 31/ Today on acount of T Kitchen getting shut down, The whole inmates of this Camp hawe to goe to 2 Kitchens 300 Internees had to goe to No 1 Kitchens 600 Internees to No 3 Kitchen, in adition to the 1200 Men going their before. With mostly all the Pots broken & old, the Cooks hawe a picnic indeet, to get a meal ready in time. June 1/ Today is the first visiting day for the married Internees. This is the first for months, as this Camp has been quarantined from the out-

[Page 86]

-side world on account of the Flu, since than. 4/ This morning on acount of a young Internee 25 years of age not being at roll call, a search wher made by the Police, wich found him hanging inside a big loop made out of clothes line & fastened on the Iron piping inside the 7 Company 6 Messe, wich is their to hold the Internees bunks. As the whole inmates of this barrack was empty at the time, the former ocupants hawing being transfered to places vacated by repatriated Interneees, no one can give anything definite evidence. This unfortunate Internee was known not to be right mentally, & on acount of a former offence comitted by him, his Mess Mates would not converse with him, therefore he had shifted with all his belongings, to the empty barrak. The night previously he had been to the pictureshow. When found, he wher standing on right foot, left foot in the bottom bunk, his left arm resting on the top bunk; around his heck he had a scarfe & the loop in wich he hung was fully 1 foot long. He wher taken out & burried during the afternoon. He had been interned for over 4 years & had earned, when comon work ceased, a few pence daily, by selh selling Campmade Caps. During the day a list wher send into Camp, containing names of Internees for repatriation on the third transport. During this day, it wher much evident how records of Internees wher Keept on the otherside of the fence, as in two cases, the Military Police searched to find 2 Internees, one wich had been shot dead & died in the

[Page 87]

hospital on the sa next day, about 2 years ago & another who had died about 12 months ago, in the Camp hospital. Also in several cases for Men, who allready wher repatriated. The writer knows of one instance, when they looked for F. Ehrlish who had 3 Children to suport in Australia, they found him to be repatriated, & at high sea, while O Ehrlich, the Men who should be on the transport still in Camp. 5/ This day a notice got issued to the Camp, by Provost Marshall Drummond, forbidding to light any fires between barraks, either during the day, or evening, but had advise issued to be permitted, to use the Camp Kitchens, betwen the time of 2 & 3 each afternoon, or else the General fire place, behind the Germ. Teather. As the later, was only a kind of gutter about 1 foot broad by 20 feet long & no firewood issued by the Authoritys, to keep the fire going, this later advise was of no use, to any Internee, during the cold evenings of this time of the season. On account of the Canteen not taking many orders of Buisness concerns inside the Compound in view of the early repatriation, several Shops hawe closed, 3 hawe been dismantled allready, wich had been erected a year ago, the owners hawing being repatriated with the last transport, while some of the other shops hawe been turned into living apartements. 7/ & 8/ Today the list for 3th transport came out inside the camp & finished on the next. The name of the transport is the Mons o Grontes, sailing under the Portugese flag, but being a Nord German Loyd Steamer called the "Bremen" untill the outbreak of the World War.

[Page 88]

Their wher about 1500 Names on the list for repatriation. This day also the Allien Board arived hier, to consider the Internees aplicationes, to being permitted to remain in Australia. The time of the Boards arival wher notified for 10 a. m, however their arival by Military "Char a Bank" was close on 12 oclock. Each State had their own Tents, erected the day previously by the Military. The Writer only can speak of the experience during the hearing of this sayd Board in the South Australian Tent, the State from wich he had been transferred to this Camp. The Board consisted of a Police Magistrate, I think the Name of this Gentleman is Mr Sinclair & a Officer of the 4 Military District Adelaide, a Captain, I think the Name of this Gentleman was Mr Burrows. They Magistrate asked the following Questiones: ) Age. (Answer by Writer 34 years. ) Married) Yes ) Children (two. ) Wifes Place of birth. S. A. When arested . January 3th 1915. Got any reasones to know why interned. Yes. becourse a Miner called me a German Bastard, to wich I retalliated with the use of my fist, also the Public feeling against Germans & Austrians ran high in the Barrier, becourse 2 Afghans, but called Turks by the Authoritys had shot upon a Picnic train a week previous to my arrest. Hawe you ever been in any trouble outside. Yes got ones fined 1 & pound; & 6 Sh cost for riotous behavior. The Magistrate "O that is a trivial offence.

[Page 89]

Have you ever been in any Jail. No. What ocupation do you follow outside. Boxcing & working in the Mines. What ocupation will you take up if permitted to remain in the Colonies. Either in the Mines, Rigger Gang or I can sail on the Coast in some kind of a trading ship. In fact it is immaterial to me what kind of work, as I have a healthy body & a willing mind. It would be immaterial to me, if the Authoritys deported me or not, if my Wife & family wher able to speak any other language, but english, as I must work for my living hard wherever I go. But as no doubt, the public feeling in 0Germany against the english race is something simmiliar, as out hier towards the German, I think it will only mean trouble, if I take my family across Water, & as I am a Men I am better able to bear all consequence in that respekt, than a defenceless Women. Also on account of my Wife not being able to speak German, it would cause serious trouble in my household their & domestic affairs. The Magistrate toke a note of all my answers & than told me "That will do. " During my hearing the Military official never spoke a word, but only looked through "Personalien Acten" than put them away again. Now I will hawe to await the official reply if I will be permitted to remain in or not, as sayd previously if it wher not for my family, I would only be too glad to shake the dust of my this Country of my boots, becourse

[Page 90]

I predict a bad future ahead for the whole Australian Workers on account of the Industrial upheaval every wher, the high cost of living, the heavy taxation ectra. It is a wonder, that in this Camp alone about 4000 healthy Internees formerly employed in some kind of industry in Australia, hawe aplied for repatriation willingly & gladly & allmost every one, Will say "Thank god" when he sees the last of this shores, becourse the treatment recieved at the hands of the National Government, since this World War started & during their internment, has been a bitter lesson to all of them. It has teached all inmates of this Camp that Civilication & humanity is a foreign ephited by those in charge of Australian international affairs. 9/ This morning the Military Police found on the space formerly ocupied by a Restaurant, but since demobilised as formerly stated, a Cellar. This they took for a clue of a illicit still, & worked hard to find something in that respekt. But the work proved a faillure, as this Cellar had only been used as a store room & cooler during the hot summer months. This day the I Wisiting day for married Internees 10. Two Austrian Internees wher taken to the Hospital, & the sicknes dignosed as "Pnoumonic Influenza" This gawe indeet a severe Scare to all the inmates2 Companys of Internees in wich the sick Internees had lived wher ordered to park all their belongings & the Military wagons carted same to the quaran

[Page 91]

Compound. The Internees following. This wher done as a safety, from keeping the epedemic from spreading amongst us Internees. All over Australia, this pest has ravaged & found his victims by the tousands, while this Camp, was lucky in that respekt, however at the last moment, for this pest to find his way amongst us, wher a just reason to scar us all to a certain extent. During this forenoon several Internees selected for the III transport the Tras os Montes wher inoculated on the left arm. Most every Internee inoculated complains, about the pains of the after effect. During the afternoon, they got orders to bring their heavy luggage to the gates ready to put same in the luggage vans for transportation to the pier, after same had undergone a thorough search, by the watchfull Censors. 11/ Clothing issue continues. All Internees, not posessores of a complete suite of Clothes, get one issued to them. The material of same is II grade quality Cloth & Factory made, but still it is better than nothing. All these suits are made of one pattern, so all alike. The rest of the Clothing consist of a second hand pair of Military Boots, a new singlet, new Cap, & socks, in some instances also second hand. A Overcoat & Cardigan jacket, got issued to those, who did not recieved this sayd articles during the past 2 years, as this is the

[Page 92]

time limit of wear, put down by the Authoritys, & than only wher the exchange granted, if a Internee could produce the old apearal & prove that same had a reasonable wear & taer & unable to be mendet in any way. The Allies board is still sitting, to hear aplicationes of Internees, married or single to be permitted to remain in Australia. Naturaliced Internees are called into the Intellegence Department, wher they must sign a declaration, that repatriation takes place, at their own free will. Amongst these, are several married Internees with Wifes & families in Australia. I several instances the Wifes refuse to acompany their husband & no doubt, the only alternative left, for these Women, is, to remain, as the Authoritys cannot compell the Husband & father, to remain in Australia, if he decides otherwise, as the Wife pla in her marriage vows gives herself to the man under the words of "Honor & obey. " So it is her own lookout, that if her future, in regards of finding a Bread winner in the fu doubtfull. Also in this instance, it is proven that also in Australia, as well as in other parts of the Globe their are some Women, who only look upon marriage, as a "legaliced prostitution. " The Writer knows one instance, wher the Internee on date of Internment left a Wife & two Children behind The youngest 4 months old. Since Internement (4 years) he never has seen neither Wife & Children, but allways

[Page 93]

has kept in constant weekly corespondende of the most afectionable terms. This Internee also aplied for repatriation with Wife & 2 children, but fancy his surprise when laterly informed by the Departement, that he would be repatriated per S. S. "Gras os Montes" acompanied by Wife & four Children. Against the acompanyment of the two stranger, this respektive Internee complained, however without getting satisfaction. In another instance, a Wife of a Intenee wrote back to him & told him, she would not acompany him, but that he could take their Son (the only offspring of their marriage) with him. Any animal fights, before it gives has its young forcibly taken away. Wher is the mother love of this Women coming in. I think a Men, is indeet lucky, that he gets rid of the Shakles of such a human Dragon in females garb. As this next transport will be ocupied by several married Internees, Wifes & families is noticeable by the lot of Names of married Internees upon the repatriation list. The joy is immense in this Camp, as over a tousend Internees will be repatriated by the " Mas o Frontes" & another big batch to follow on the "Wyreema. " When this batch has gone, will about empty this Camp of German Internees, who wishe to be repatriated. Of course the Austrianes will still remain, as no one in this Camp knows, when their turn will come, but they al hope &

[Page 94]

June 11. Clothing issue continues, all Internees not possessors of a complete suite, get one issued. The material of same is II quality & the make, is factory all suits are alike in clothing & make, but it is better than nothing. Allies board still sitting to hear aplicationes of Internees married or single for permittance to remain in Australia. Naturaliced Intenees, repatriated on the Willorhra are called into the Intelligence Departement, wher they must sign a declaration, that the repatriation takes place at their own wishe. Among those are several married Internees, with Wifes & family in Australia. The later however decline to acompany the Husband & Father to Germany so no doubt they must remain in Australia as the only alternative. Several more Internees wher added to the list of repatriation. The joy is immense in the Camp, knowing this to be the largest transport of Internees out of this Camp. When they hawe gone, this Camp will be about half empty. The Camp rumor will have it that the Austrian Internees, taken out of Camp yesterday to be quarantined had been offered work no admaking, the work, who had ceased during the last strike The pay should be & pound; 1 per week to keep also the usual clothing, becourse the Government had

[Page 95]

had undertaken to finishe this certain road If this rumor has any truth in it, the writer cannot say, but generally in this Camp, Wher their is smoke, their is fire. The Clothing issued to repatriated Internees consisted mostly with the exception in shirt & caps, secondhand wearing apearels. In a few instances the socks issued wher also new ones. If an Internee did not hawe his overcoat & Cardigan jackets issued to him two years ago, or more, none would be issued to him, as this is the time required by the authority for same to last & than the issue would only be granted, when the old ones wher produced & proved reasonable prove, that the articles could not be mendet any more. 12/ This day the Allies Board wher still continuing the sitting. The issue of Clothing to intendet repatriated Internees also continued. During this dal all Naturaliced Intenees wher called to the enquiry office & following questiones asked How old. When arived in Australia. The Nationality of Wife previous to marriage. Who How many Children. If wished to be repatriated or not. If the former. Will you be acompanyd by Wife & family So This enquiry, as well as the allies board, only proved a farce & wher only a enquiry "performance. " Mostly all the Intenees young or old wher told to be ready for next transport, without

[Page 96]

any other questiones being asked. Several Interneees aplied for permission, to goe to the place, & City of former residence to settle their private & business affairs, this however got in all instances refused, & told to settle their affairs by letter. Proffessor Begelke Boese, born in Denmark, but grown up in Belgium, wher his family still resides, wher called before Capt Bardsley, the Inteligence Officer & the Comandant Hollman & told to sign his name under a form, wich stated, that his repatriation to Germany wher of his own free will. As this sayd Gentleman is not a German he refused to be repatriated to that Country, but wher willing to sign for repatriation to Belgium. On account of his persisting not to sign anything, but as those mentioned, he wher put under arrest by those sayd officials & placed in the isolation cell of the lock up. For reasones only known to the Authorities, the Austrian section of this Camp wher fenced in by Soldiers & guards placed at the two gates, wich wher open. Any one passing the Sentery had to produce a permit, else not allowed to pass. It is well known hier, that 5 Austrians left with the last 2 transport under the Names of German Internees, wich they had payd to remain & let them go under their Name instead. Most likely, to prevent another ocurence of this sort, wher the reason of the authority for fencing in this particulary section. On thisday during evening hours a Internee in the Austrian Camp lost his reasones & turned dog mad. Same wher taken

[Page 97]

to the hospital,for excaminnation, thance returned to the isolation cell of the lock up wher he got keept under restraint. On acount of the Austrian section being closed in separately, the Internees, who gused to run a nightly picture show herein, wher compelled to cease to show, as the German Internees, the main inmates of the Camp could not apear at the show, for reasones formerly stated, theirefore this hall is now closed & useless. The Camp, only boast now of one picture hall the formerly skating Rink, wich mostly shows twice nightly, first performance, comences at 6 p. m & the second at 9 p. m. So it an extra got programe, they also show during the afternoon & needless to say the house is allways marked "All tickets sold" long before the show comences, as this is the only place, wich ocupies the mind in mirth & laughter & so away from the endless monotony of Internment life in general. 13/ During the forenoon the following notice appeared on the Notice board in german language (translated) Internees who are Britishe subjects & who desire, to be repatriated to Germany or Austria, must hand in a aplication to the Comandant not later than June 15th. dated June 12th signed W. H. Bardsly Lieut

[Page 98]

pray that it will be soon. As sayd previously about 200 Austrian Internees had been taken out of this Camp under Quarantine regulationes, the Camp rumor today is, that they had been offered employment (roadmaking) the work wich has ceased during the last strike, as the Authoritys had made a Contract with Sutherland Council, to finishe this Road The pay to be & pound; 1 per week, with usual rationes & Clothing, wich however the Austrian Internees had refused. If it is the truth the Writer cannot say, but the previous experience in this Camp has proven the old adage "Wher their is smoke, their is also fire" to be a good & true adage. 12/The Allies Board still continuing, also the clothing issue of intendet repatriated Internees. During this day, all Naturaliced Internees called again to the Intelligence Departement & asked the following questiones. How old. When arived in Australia The nationality of Wife previously to the marriag, Any Children & how many. If wished to repatriated or not. If acompanied by Wife & family or not. This enquirey, as well as the Allies board only proved a farce, & a unccessary expence by the Deffence Departement, as mostly all questiones asked of a Internees in both this enquiry, had been asked of the Internees over & over again & wich in each instance had been taken down in writing. During the last 3 weeks mostly all Internees for repatriated young or old wher called to officials of the Departement

[Page 99]

& told "To be ready for the next transport" without any other questiones being asked, if willing or not. Several Internees aplied for permission, to go to the former place of residence previously to their repatriation, so as to enable them, to settle their business & private affairs, but in each instance they wher told, that their request could not be granted, & they could settle that by coresponde. During this day Proffessor Bejelke Boese, born in Dennemark of Danish Parents, but who had been Interneed in this Camp by the Authoritys & under some charge wher called before Captain Bardsley, the Intelligence Officer of this Camp & the Comandant Hollman & requested to sign a document wich stated that his repatriation to Germany wher of his own free will. As this sayd Gentleman is not a German, & has no claim upon that Governement, he refused to sign this document, stating he wher prepared to sign for repatriation to Belgium, wher his family still resides. This request however was refused by the two officers & on acount of his refusal to sign the document as stated, he wher ordered to placed in arrest, to remain therein until the departure of the next transport. On this day, the Austrian section of this Camp, got fenced in by labor done by Soldier guards. The reasones for same are not shure. But it is comon knowledge in this Camp, that 5 Austrian Internees, had payd some

[Page 100]

German Internee, to change places with them & so enable them, to get away from this Country on board the Transport Willorhra. The Austrian Camp hereafter had only 2 gates wher a soldier guard stood duty inspekting permits of any Internee passing through the gate. If the Internee had no special permit, he was not allowed to pass. Their for the fencing in of this section wher a preventive meassure of the Camp authoritys, to hawe another occurence previously, happening again. On this day, an Austriane, interned in this section lost his reasons & turned "dog mad" Same wher taken to the hospital for examination, thance returned to the "lock up" & placed in a Isolation Cell previously him being removed to the lunatic Assylium the next morning When taken their by ambulance, the Writer noticed his head & faces much bruised & swollen; as informed the result of running with his head against the Cement Wall & Fron door during the Night. On account the biggest Entertainment Hall in this Compound build entirely at the expense of Internees & Internees labor & wich had been used as a nightly Picture show got also fenced in, theirfore the Internees wher forced to close this hall on acount of Austrian Internee not is sufficient to cover the expences of the hiring of films, therefore the Camp only boasts now of 1 Picture Theater
[Continued on page 103]

[Page 101]

[Newspaper clipping, on which it appears there was a handwritten date which has been crossed out]
German Interneees’ Complaint
Not Enough Exercise For Jaws
A Military Court yesterday (consisting of Colonel Kindon, president,Major Wells, M. C. and major Moyes, M. C. heard evidence in a chargeagainst Paul Willims, a prisoner of war, interned at the German Concentration Camp,Holdsworthy, of committing an offence in that he, at Darlinghurst Detention Barracks, whilst confined there on March 26, acted to the prejudice of the control of prisoners of war by making undue noise.
Captain Candy prosecuted.
Lieutenant Heron, officer commanding Darlinghurst Detention Barracks, said on the evening of march 26 he had a complaint from outsidethat a disturbance was being made in the barracks. Her went to the door of accused's cell, and told him and others that if the noise did not cease he would take their names.
In reply to accused, witness said that the Chief Justice sent a messageregarding the noise. They were shouting out "Are we downhearted?"and then there would be a chorus of "No!" followed by "cat-calling. "
Accused: Did we not make the noise to get something better to eat?-You were not entitled to anything better. Orders were not issued to give you something better,in order to stop the noise.
Do not the prisoners always "sing out" when they are hungry?- I don't know when they are hungry.
Sergeant A. M'Lean, cross-examined by accused, said that when he went to the cell accused was lying on his face with his mouth to the bottom of the door, and calling out for "Meyer". He put a set of "muffs" on him and tied a towel round his mouth to stop the noise he was making.
Accused, giving evidence, said that he was locked up in his cell about 4. 30 p. m. on March 26. Some noise was made by the interness but not in his cell. Sergeant M'Lean came to the cell and charged him with making a noise, which he denied. Handcuffs were put on him and a piece of rope and a piece of rag were put in his mouth. He was gagged. Others were making a noise because some of the prisoners were not getting enough to eat. They only got a pice of dry bread in the afternoon.
Albert Kriest, a prisoner of war, said that for some time after he was locked in his cell he was killing mosquioes and flies. He heard Meyer and Willhems call out for their muffs to be taken off, as they could not get air. He heard no noise before that. Calling out to get their "muffs" gave them a little exercise for their jaws, as they could not get enough to eat. The little dry bread they got at night was not sufficient for a man.
At the request of the accused the hearing was adjourned until April 24 for the production of further evidence.

[Page 102]
Deported Germans
Wives Refuse To Go
What Of The Children?
Wives of some of the Germans who have received notice from the Commonwealth Government of thei deportation have given notice of their refusal to accompany their husbands to Germany.
Two boats carrying deported germans and their families will leave Sydney in the near future. The Tras-Esmontes is schudled to leave on June 17 while the Wyreema will go on June 23 or 25.
Up till now there has been practically no dislocation of family ties,the wife in each instance being willing to accompany her husband who has been deported. But the authorities have now received noticefrom several women who state flatly that they have no intention of goingto Germany, notwithstanding that their husbands haver no option in the matter.
Recently, by private arrangement, the wife of a german refused to accompany her husband,although she was willing and gave her sanction to their young son making the trip.

Wives May Remain
The Commonwealth Authorities are not deporting women unless they wish to accompany their deported husbands, and the women who have decided to remain are in each instanceAustralians.
So far the authorities in this State have not been called apon to decidethe question of either parent's right to the children ,supposing that the wife refused to go, but in the case of that question arisingit will be assumed that an alien enemy has no rights, and the children will remain with the mother.
If by reason of the deportation of the breadwinner the dependents become destitute, it will be a question as to whether they will become a charge on the Commonwealth or the State.

Only $50 To Be Taken
As it is, the regulations provide that no german deportee shall take with him more than $50 in specie or paper money. Anything he may have more than that must for the present be left with a friend or attorney. This regulation relates to Germans on parole who arew to be deported.
It has also been decided that no German shall be allowed to take with him more than 84 lb. of luggage, exclusive of hand baggage, and the luggage he takes into the cabinmust not exceed a space of 40 inches by 80 inches by 12 inches. He may carry excess luggageat his own expense as cargo, supposing there is room for it.
Both the tres-es- Momtes and the Wyreema will be full ships

[Page 103]
[continued from page 100]
the former skating ring, wich showed 2 programmes nightly, one at 6 p. m until 8. 45 & the other until 11. p. m When a good programme their was also a extra show during the afternoon, commencing at 2 p. m. Needless to say, on account of only on3 Pictureshow, the tickets for admittance are always sold out every programme as this is now the only place of amusement left in our Camp, all Clubs & Theater having dissolved weeks ago.
13/ During the forenoon the following notice wher issued to this Camp. In German language (translated)Internees who ar Britishsubjects & desire tobe repatriated to Germany or Austria musthand(crossed out) send in a written application to the Comandant not later than June 15th dated June 12th signed W. H. Bardsly Captain. During this day the Internees , noticed a former Internee of this camp, but put into SinghSingh by the authorituies on account of being in possession of a illicit still outside the Police Station. This Internee had suxcessfully effected his escape some time back, out of Singh Singh Compound. As I have been informed,he has residet since his escape in & near Sydney. During the epidemic of the flu, his mate, who also escapewd on the same occasion contracted the disease had died in a Sydney Public Hospital. So he wher left alone in a Enemy Country pursuit by Civil & Military Police. So when the Willorhra had sailed he read the account of the inmates of SinghSingh having been deported with this transport. He surrendered to the Authorit-.

[Page 104]
ties,wich returned him to his Camp, to await the next shipment. He wherkeept in the Lockup, wher also 3 other formerly escaped Internee wher detained until the sailing. 2 formerly escaped Internees wher permittedto enter camp. All these Internees had surrenderet out of the motive of repatriation. The 5 shilling out of the Canteen fundwher payd to all Internees to be repatriated next week. In adition the Seafaring men taken of steamers belonging to the Hamburg Austral Line, at the commencement of the War, received the sume of $2each previously to their departure next week.
14/Internees per Gras as Montes wher called into the Inteligence Office, wher each had to sign his "Character sheet" kept by the Authorities since commencement of Camp of each Internee. This day the following notice issued to the Camp " A memo to hand from the swiss Consulstating that he has recieivedcable advice Rate of exchange this month is 62 Mark to the Sterling Signed H. H. Mitchell Lieutenant, Paymaster G. C. C.
On making enquiries of the Internees wich owne the Picture Shows in this Camp, I wher given a rough estimate that 2 new programs each day cost at least $5. theirfore a rough estimate,will bring the summe at $2000 yearly, as on several
[At bottom of page- $8685 1918 till1819 film hire]

[Page 105]
days even 3 programs have been shown, in adition of super featureFilms, wich wher more espencive. This is without the cost of Ether with wich ea operat wher driven, also tickets extra. So the public can gues, how Internees spend their money, to keep their mind from being unhinged, at their own iniative & without any assistance of the Government, to assist in passing long ,weary, & monotonoushours away, also to keep a Internee from brooding over the puzzle, Religion,Justice, & Humanity & fair play.
15/On this day the usual monthly assistance 10 shilling got payd out wich get sed regular by the German Government, to assist the Internees during their confinement, wich could prove by Documents in their possession to be of German Nationality. Several Internees produced their Military Discharge from germant but wher told this wher insufficient evidenc. So swindle also reignedin this Camp, as well as outside becourse every Internee hier, wher suffering becourse he either happened to be born in Germany, or of German Parents in another country. So needless to say ,We all suffered for theFather Land.

[Page 106]

All Internees for transportation taken before Medical Doctor, their they had their temperatures taken. 42 Internees wher detained & placed in isolation. Herein tents wher erected for them. As the Authorities wher short of bedding for those internees, Bunks wher taken out of Camp for their use. During the afternoon their belongings wher carted per Military Wagon up tpthem. Over 100 doubyful cases wher admitted to return to Camp. These, however had to live in 36 Com[any evacuated by the German Imperial Soldiers, since repatriated. Hier they only had to sleep, however mongled with all Internees during the day. As mostly all Business Concern, in view of the earlyemptying of this Camp & the Repatriation of the Owners, all they(crossed out) had closed, with the exception of 1 Restaurant, wher nothing but Coffee could be had, Hunger begins to tell the tale in this Camp as all most 60%of the Internees, bought daily their meals in one of the Restaurants, while the remaining 70% bought additional foodstuffs from these shops to keep body & soul together. Thank God. This lifw wont last much longer.
16/As two of the Guards had died of the" flue"at the Camp hospital the most of the Military Policewore masks. The Authorities asked this dayof Dr Gisselbark, a internee, if he wher willing to give his help, in cse of the epidemic spreading. This Gentleman refusing, giving his reason, that the request of the camp Committeerr during 1916 to be permitted, to deal with [last 4 words indecipherable]

[Page 107]
The Compound had been refused, also that under threatening with arrest, he wher forbidden ,to deal proffessiounaly with any Interneee, if sick & only seeking advice, he coulsd not grant the request asked for, but left everything in the hands of the Authorities, who detain us. During this (indecipherable), a Cook, also about half a dozen Internees wher called for to volunteer, to act as Cook & orderlies, payable at the rate of 4 sh & 2 sh. respectively daily,at the Quarantine Camp. These position got soon filled,As stated previously, the Austrians had been fenced offfrom the Main Compound & soldier guards placed at the gates of same, the Austrian Internee producing a Ticket formerly issued at the Austrian Theater during interval, wich contained in pront the words "passout" to one of the guards & same wher permitted to come out & goe in , when he desired. That a lot of underhand work is going on, by the Authorities is evident in following Cases. A Internee formerly a butcher in Loxton S. A. married to an Australian, had informed his wife, that for indecipherable claimage of lost & damaged property by himself to the proper Authorities, previously to his being repatriated she should sign nothing, no paper whatever

[Page 108]

Unless instructed by him. As he had said in his claim for losing his stock & property to the Deffence Department, to wich he however had not received replys, when told that he would e repatriated by the S. S. Wyreena declined to sail willingly in this sayd transport, that the Authoritys must force him on board. His sayd Internee also made protest to the Comandant, also the official Visitor, to being compelled to leave all his earthly belongings in Australia, without compensation of any sort, this Gentleman promised with the usual reply" I see what I can do for you" wich means "Ido nothing, get out. To the surprise of this Internee, his wife wrote informwed himthat the Loxton police had called & requested her to sign a document, that she is willingly prepared to leave with her husband. To this she remonstrated with the official,informing him of her husbands advice. However received the reply 'your husband has applied for repatriation & will leave Australia in ten days time. As she does not wishe to be separated from her Husband & the father of her Australian born Children, she signed the dec;laration.
The Wife of the Writer, has been visited by a pfficial of the Military & also asked the same question, to wich she did not reply & wher told to consider it, as he would call again in a few days time. Upon informing me of theseI advised her to inform the Authority, that she intendet to remain in Australia, as I had applied for permission

[Page 109]
to do likewise for following reasones. Neither of my family understand a word of the German language, neither the costum of the inhabitants of thet Country. The hate their against the British Race, will be just as severe,as out hier against the German Race, but as I am a Man, I would be better ableto bear the consequences, than a defenceless Women. Also that on account of the food rationes issued hier, I had been compelled to use mostly all of my private resources. We would land over their Homeless,penny less, & without much wearing apearal, & in a Country wich I had not seen for 18 years. That if the Authorities deemed fitt, to deport me, the Civiliced Laws would see to it ,trhat they would not starve, becourcse I would return within two years time, to my own, & no law can compel me to remain away from my family. As I have workedas a respectable Citizen in Australi , ever since I came to Australiain the year 1900 without a blemisheor stain on my character, but Birth. No Police records wher against me as an" undesireable" Theirfore, as I predict that the Governement of Australia will have a big sett back after the next Federal ElectionThe Governement then in power will grant me thair permission to remain in Australi a. As I have a healthy body & a willing mind, I look towards living in wich

[Page 110]

ever Country, I deemed fitt to reside, it wher for the beforesaid reasones, I had decidet to remain in Australia with my family, however I am still in the hands of the Alienboard & my fate in store wher uncertain at the present. On this day all Australian born Internees & naturalised Internees wher called into the Inteligence Departement & asked if they desire to be repatriated, if not 'the name of the town & state they had come from, also wich ocupation they would likely follow,when released. Some of the not naturalised Internees of N. S. W. who had appeared before the Allien board, had to appear again today & wher informed of their verdict". This day, the most of the Internees, to be repatriated tomorrow are dressed up in the Governement suit & walkingrestlessly about the Camp, knowing the end has come, the last hours are the most monotonous. At last the day has arrived, wher 1600 Internees have been waiting for during the past years. This morning Breakfast wher served in the Kitchens at 6 am. At 6. 30 the repatriated Internees had to return the Blankets to the store & to await for the first transport, wich owing to conviniance wher in alphabetical order, The first train left Camp for Syd ney about 10. 30 the next shortly after 11 & the last at 11 45. With the exception of the Send Of by the Camp Band, as some had disbandet & several members wher on this transport, every wher as joyfull again, as stated during the sound off

[Page 111]
Per last boat. The joy wher immense,Those intending repatriated Internees knowing that their turn would come with the next, while those who wishe to remain in Australia,their turn would come soon. Havent yearts gone by of agony suffering & monotony, shurly the rest of the few weeks, will pass also,yea, let it be months, until we get our liberty restored & ease a poor Mothers heart, when theyre little ones enquiry "Mammy will Daddy come home tomorrow, she can take them in their arms and say "Yes deary, at last the long waited for day has come. "
Not like during the past years, she had to answer 'We must have patience Deary & when the little ones enquired insecantly Why cannot Daddy returnto us Mamy & the Mother heavy hearted replied"He would come home to us at ones,darling, butr the Government will not allow him to come. ' Theirupon the little prattle again "Why mummy is daddy a bad Men, has he done something bad" & the answer is "No deary, your Daddy is one of the best, he wouldn’t willingly hurt anybody nor do anything bad" theirupon the little one answering "Mamy, the Government is very bad". Indeet dear reader, it is impossible for you to imagine the happiness it causes those who see the last time this dante inferno or

[Page 112]
Black hole in Australia, wher deeds have been committed inumerously against Civilication & humanity as truthfull accounts, I have stated, permit me to use this expression. However the happiest hour is thanstill to come. This will be when , the Internee is united with his family ones more & able to press real kisses ipon their lips instead of the X on paper, as during the past 4 years. Mind dear reader, I don’t think too many Internees left Australia with a grudge against the population as a whole. The grudge & hate carries the Government with is responsible for the welfare & upkeep of Internees to permitt crimes & astrocities to be committed in Civilicet Australia wich are against International & all human laws. Dinner got served on this day to those remaining in this Campat 11 a. m. As mostly all were overjoyedat the knowledge of soon having seen the ;last of this 'Place of Hell on earth" the most dit not feel hungry, in consequence, the Dinner on this day was indeet better, than any Xmass dinner issued to us in this Compound. During the day, the scavenger Gang, had their labot cut out, in carting the rubbish out of the Camp to the Cinerator as a preventative measure in Keepinng the Flu epedimic from out of our midst, knowing several cases having taken place during the last few days. As during the

[Page 113]
[Newspaper cuttings]
Back To Holdsworthy
Germans on Tras-os-Montes

The transport Tras-os-Montes, with 1400 deportees aboard, came out of quarantine to-day, andproceeded to No 8 wharf, Pyrmont, where special trains were waiting to take the germans back to Holdsworthy Camp.
This was necessary because of a severe outbreak of influenza aboard the vessel, the disease having affecxted thecrew as well as the deportees.
The first report showed that there were 40 cases aboard, but sincethen many others have gone down with the disease.
Yesterday's Figures
28 Deaths, 214 New Cases
For the 24 hours ended 8 p. m. yesterday 28 deaths from influenza were reported within the metropolitan area.
During the same period there were 214 new case, while 131 patients were discharged, leaving 1826 still in hospital.
Outbreak on Tras-os Montes.
More cases of influenza have developed on obard the steamer Tras-os-Montes, which cleared the Heads a few days back with 1400 Germansfor Rotterdam, but returned to port, and proceeded to Quarantine. When the vessel returned it was found that there were 40 cases on board, but since then others have contracted the disease. Many of the patients have been despatched to the Holdsworthy Concentration Camp.
The Tras-os-Monteswill be taken at 9 o'clock this morning from the quarantine area to No. 8 Wharf, Pyrmont, for the purpose of disembarking the balance of the Germans.

[Page 114]
[continued from page 112]
few years, the Internees had gathered everything , knowing it might come handy, also wearing apperalof all kinds & conditions, also the self made furniture & old Boots Books & Paper, everything got tossed about the evacuated barracks. On these day as well as during the past, wherample proof to be found" Who careless this Government is in saving money. Clothing, Boots, Furniture of all description got cartd to the Cinerator, articles wich many familyin nearby Sydney would have been glad to accept. Still there are charitable institutiones outside wich also would have accepted thankfully several selected articles, anough to fill at least three Railway carriage of articles formerly mentioned. However with the waste in general I deal at the end of my book.
17/List of the "Wyreema"wher issued, & it added to the joy.
18/This morning the Inmates of the Camp wher astonished to find 9 half dead Internees, who had left the day previously for repatriation with the Mouso Fronter laying in one of the empty barracks, no bedding nor blinds. Upon enquirey we wher informed that they had been examined upon arrival on board & found to be suffering from Pneumonic Influenza & so detained for treatment in one of the Sydney Hospital. They had been driven to two different hospitals, wich however had refused them admittance becourse they wher Prisoners of War. They cought the last train under guard for Liverpool from their they had been brought hier with a private Motor Car. Upon arrival each

[Page 115]
got handet 3 Blankets & told to enter Camp & await parade the next morning. As it wher passed midnight, they gathered some old Strohsarks from the Rubbish heap in the Main Street & layd in the Barrack. Upon this information, the whole Camp protested in having Contacts thrown amongst us, but demandet to have some removed to the hospital. As the hospital wher over filled, the doctor sayd, this wher an impossibility, but permitted us to use one of the Camp School buildings, as an emergency isolation hospital. As I further state, this done the harm towards our well being, wich we internees had maintained during our Internement. Ones we had the Contacts amongst & the disease advanced in leaps & boundsamongst the Internees. As mostly the remaining Internees consisted of the Working Class, they dependet upon the Clothing issued by the Governement. The last Issue had takenplace in October last year,wich in most instances consisted of a Khaki Coat & Trousers/Shirt/pair of socks, limsu hat & one pair of boots, the most had worn their wearing apparel, till unable to wear the Rags any longer. When the better Class Internees left this Compound a day or two ago, they wher enabled to gather thrown away appearal & cover the allmoat nude body. Though international Law , compel a Government to keep Prisoners of War in the same food & clothing regulation as his soldiers, however not so with this Government, as only lately we received soxs, & never any underclothing. No matter if a Internee is young or old. So as the Climate condition are very

[Page 116]

changeable, Rain, cold & windy, that Internees got a severe cold, the root of the Pneumonicx Influenza. When the inmates of this Compound wher informed, that the much hated Flu wher amongst us everybody wher willing to assist in stamping it out. During the morning a Patient with 105 degree fever wher removed to the outside hospital . As the Inmates had to make emergency hospitals the Internees gave up their Private Stretchers & bedding, others build the Bunks. Internees wher collapsing like Ninepins everywhere. The Outside hospital being overfilled, the Internees fixced up every spare building inside the Compound, as a Emergency hospital. As doctor Finselbark (a Internee with about 20 other Internees) as Attendant wher looking after Isolation Camp No. 3, the Military send a Military Doctor named Captain Muir age 71 years & a young orderly Sergeant inside the Camp. I give them credit, they worked both like horses for the welfare of the sick Internees. As the disease wher making progressin leaps & bounds amongst rthe undernourished Internees the four shoobbuildings wher filled during the forenoon. Indeet the 4 Internees who volunteered as stretcher bearers had a very busy day. Every healthy Internee wher making Bunks for emergency purposes. During the afternoon the Gymnastic Hall got filled with 80 Beds & a patient in each. As on account of the last transport the Camp wher filled with garbage Clothing & old Strawm thrown away by repatriated Internees, Doctor Muir ordered instant removal. So during the afternoon 3 big Military Waggons & 7 tip drays came into Camp. About 50 Voluntary Internees loadet same for the next two days constant. As fast as they could empty them , they got refilled with rubbishe. INdeet it wher

[Page 117]
lucky that 1600 Internees had left Camp, as the Military could send in their blankets for the sick. I shiver to think, if these disease had broken out amongst us, a week earlier, as the CampAuthoritys would have had nothing to assist us with. 20/ Still sick laying in all Barracks. So 2 Restaurants, Chess Club, Choral Society, School of Arts & Austrian Theater,all Internees property, got transferred intoEmergency hospital by the Sick Committee. "About 10 Internees gathered Strawsacks out of the rubbish heap & used formerly by repatriated internees,as the Camp Authoritys had none to give us. Straw gort issued to us, so as fast as a bed could be got ready, a patient wher waiting to occupy it. The Number of attendance inside the Camp only consisted of 1 Military Doctor 1 Sergeant 4 Internee Chemist 50 Attendants 4 Stretcher bearers 3 Cooks 20 Workers & 10 Rouseabouts. With the exception of the first 2 all other Internees, wich had voluntared willingly & without renumeration of ant sort. This day . as plenty timber is available from the AiustrianTheater 4 Carpentersworking all day making bunks for the sick. During the forenoon 16 Internees Attendants & 1 Cook who had voluntared for the Servicein the Garison Hospital Liverpool to attend sick Internees transferred transferred from the transport Mousos Groules got send their. As the SydneyQuarantine Station had refused to permit the sick Internees to land their, becourse they wher Pris of war, they had to remain on this overcrowdet transport for 3 days until the Authoritys ha d arranged for them to know wher theycould put them. The sick internees wher transhipped to the train for dispatch to Liverpool, a journey of 18 miles early in the morning. After a wait in the carriages all day. They left Sydney late at night, arriving at Liverpool

[Page 118]
station shortly before midnight. Captain Muir the medical doctor inside the camp & his assistant, The Sergeant wher ordered per phone, to be ready at the Station to accept the sick & give them firstaid if necessary. As this Doctor is 71 year of age & had worked inside, amongst Internees all the day like "a Horse " this action of the Deffence Department I deem unjust. However , taking the 2 handstretchers with them they left hier, & worked hard unshipping thesick from the train until 3 a. m. After the last patient had been transferred & the whole sick Internees had not had a warm drink issued to them since early in the morning, the day previouslyCaptain Muir cooked personally the Water to make tea for the sick, the only drink availale. As the Military has not been prepared for anything in case of need is much evident. The Doctor is unableto get the medicine, therefore he send a orderly to the Victoria barracks Suply Store, with the strict order not to leave until everything on the list had been issued to him. This orderly left with the ! train in the morning & returned with the last train in the evening, with about the 10th part of the order in his possession. The rest , they had been ubable to supply him with, becourse it was not in store. If doctor Muir ordered flannels for changing purposes of sick Internees from the Camp Quartermaster Malloy in most instances the orderly received thereply, "Wher am I going to take them from. I haven’t got any" & so fort, though this flannel applied for, had been due to the Internees since the past 3 months. This day about Dinner time the Internees wher returned from the Mous ors Grouter to this Camp. They arrived in 3 different trains & consisted of all the remaining Internees who had passed the medical

[Page 119]
excamination as fitt, when leaving the transport, all those who wher sick, had to remain in the garrison Hospital Liverpoollllll. As those returned numbered about 1 tousand Internees, they wher send into this camp, with eating utensils & 2 blankets each, to fid bunks for themselves inside this compound.
As the night proved indeed a cold & chilly one & the canvas blinds of the barracks wher on account of the long use rotten & full of holes, the returned Internees spend a uncomfortable sleepless night, becourse they had to,sleep on the bare wire of their bunks, & only 2 blankets to cover themselves with, whilethe draft & the windwher unsatiable. During this evening the Medical Doctors attend, a Sergeant called Ginger toke badalso & when taken temperature it wher foundto be 103 degree 21/As predicted, on account of no beddingbeing issued to the returned Internees the camp ambulance had to carry about 50 very bad cases, wich only had returned the day previously healthy into ther emergency hospital. The rest, I most cases,having caught a severe cold. At 10 a. m. they wich returned got called to the gate to receive their straw sacks & fill themwithstraw. As all the emergency hospitalsinside the Camp wich consists of 2 Restaurants 4 shools, Chess Clib, Choral Socity,School of Arts Gymnastic Hall & the Austrian Theatherwher over filled, therefore the Internees are compelled, to leaveseveral cases laying in the messes until some gets well enough toleave the Hospital. It is impossibleto take them to the Hospital outside, as theyare all overfilled & about 300 sick Internees are laying in tents now. Up until now, however I am lucky to record only 1 dead. A Austrian, married in W. A & father of 5 children. As several bad cases wher still laying in the messes inside the Barracks & so a danger to the other inmates, they doctor discharged



[Page 120]
about 30 Patients today wich had recovered sufficiently to leve the hospital & so make room for the others. As the military doctor MajorWally, had almost emptied his hospital of all Patients & snd them away for repatriation per Mons au Frontier, & when those got returned hier, & the hospital being overfilled with other patients they, wher laying in the messesinside the camp without any medical attendance or medicine. Amongst those is one Internee,whose foot is rotting off at the bottom. This internee asked some time ago, to, havethe foot amputated, as if left too long, it would only cost him his leg altogether, to this he received the reply, "you can get that done in germany. This cripple, unable to walk is also laying in a mess amongst other cases, laying amongst us, wich prove that Humanity does not exist in the government who keeps us interned.

[Page 121]
20/more sick. Chess club. Choral society. Austrian Theater emergency hospital. Attendance1 Military Doctor 1 Sergeant 4 German Chemist 50 Attendants. 4 Stretcher bearers 3 Cooks 10 Rousabouts besides 20 Workers make all ready 4 Carpenters making bunks all Internees labor voluntary. No renumeration by anyone promised at present. /16 Internees called to Liverpool Garrison Hosptabout dinner time. 2 train Grasos Montes returned, 1000 the night most go Bunks or strawto sleep. State wally refusing to sign Bill of health Order Sydney to send. State journry & while on transportState several sickonreturn. must go isolation hospitalimidiate, otherscarrier dthei. Healthy only blankets & eating utensils issued. no other bedding. Sick internees shipped forenoonSydney, transportation Liverp arived12 p. m. Captain Muir 72 years to come accept Internees assistance Corporal. transhipped hosptCapt Muir made tea. first warm drink since leaving transport. Dr Muirsend orderly to Sydney barrackswith ordernot to returnuntill all order received. Left 1 train this mornig to Sydney, returned last train only 90th of order with him. Ginger sick.
21/On account of no bedding about 30% new arrivals severe cold. 10am called to receive straw & Pallias. Now full 2 Caffees,7Shools Chess Club Choral Society Shool of Arts Gymnasic Hall & Aust. Theater. This morning about 50 discharged, other taking places immiidiately.

[Page 122]
Sick formerly in Hospt & repatriated from their also lay in messes inside Camp becourse hospital overfilled (amongst them state Crafts foot)Major Wally refused sign, therefore big blunder somewhere with cost expensive. But always same, since Camp got foundet. What authoritys build one day with handspushed over next day with bank. If 4 weeks earlier repatriated this disease never come. But as 100 officers wish make living through existing of Camp by good salary & nothing to do, all at the expence of taxpayer, they take care Camp continues as long as possible.

[Page 123]
By the writer, the two Internees had been in & near Sydney always. Ernees died in the Public Hospital, a patient of the Pneumonia Influenza. When he read in the papers, that the Inmates of Singh Singh had been repatriated per S. S. Willorhra, he surrendered to the Military authorities in Sydney, wich transported same hier, to await the next transport. The police keep him in the lockup, wher two others esc are held for the same purpose. Also those had surrendered for transportation. Two former escapees wher permitted to return to camp to await transportation. During the evening Copy enclosed in Evening paper regarding next two transports. News regarding repatriation allways welcome news by inmates of camp read eagerly. 